Neuroactive steroids in male reproduction The aim of the project is the study of the participation of neuroactive steroids (pregnenolone and isomers of pregnanolone) in the course of the male orgasm and ejaculation as a basis of potential treatment of their disturbances. allopregnanolone; pregnenolone; isomers of pregnanolone; ejaculation; orgasm; male reproduction	Neuroactive steroids in male reproduction The aim of the project is the study of the participation of neuroactive steroids (pregnenolone and isomers of pregnanolone) in the course of the male orgasm and ejaculation as a basis of potential treatment of their disturbances. allopregnanolone; pregnenolone; isomers of pregnanolone; ejaculation; orgasm; male reproduction
Improvement of care for patients with cystic fibrosis by early and efficient diagnosis via two-tier neonatal screening programme The aim is to assess the efectivity of newborn screening for cystic fibrosis in the condition of Czech Republic. cystic fibrosis; newborn screening; immunoreactive trypsin; CFTR gen	Improvement of care for patients with cystic fibrosis by early and efficient diagnosis via two-tier neonatal screening programme The aim is to assess the efectivity of newborn screening for cystic fibrosis in the condition of Czech Republic. cystic fibrosis; newborn screening; immunoreactive trypsin; CFTR gen
MOLECULAR CYTOGENETIC ANALYSIS OF BRAIN TUMOUR CELLS AND ITS CONTRIBUTION TO DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT. Molecular cytogenetic study of large cohort of patients with brain tumours. Identification of the most frequent chromosomal changes and evaluation of significance of single and cumulative cytogenetic aberrations for course and prognosis of the disease. To establish prognostic model of brain tumours on the basis of genetic aberrations. Stratification of the patients into prognostic groups with possibilities to optimalize the efficiency of the treatment. brain tumours; chromosomal aberration; molecular cytogenetics; I-FISH; prognostic factors; instability of genome	MOLECULAR CYTOGENETIC ANALYSIS OF BRAIN TUMOUR CELLS AND ITS CONTRIBUTION TO DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT. Molecular cytogenetic study of large cohort of patients with brain tumours. Identification of the most frequent chromosomal changes and evaluation of significance of single and cumulative cytogenetic aberrations for course and prognosis of the disease. To establish prognostic model of brain tumours on the basis of genetic aberrations. Stratification of the patients into prognostic groups with possibilities to optimalize the efficiency of the treatment. brain tumours; chromosomal aberration; molecular cytogenetics; I-FISH; prognostic factors; instability of genome
Modelling of potentially antimycobacterial active compounds Tuberculosis is the leading cause of death in the world from a single infectious disease. The problem arising due to MDR-TB requires the development of new agents that have better or a unique mechanism of action, different from the currently used. Attachment of our synthetic potential and SAR knowledge with the good antimycobacterial, antifungal, resp. cytoxicity evaluation is the aim of the project. Complete described series of novel prospective antitubercular/antifungal compounds will be the result ofour project. modeling; antitubercular; antifungal; cytotoxicity; synthesis; lipophilicity	Modelling of potentially antimycobacterial active compounds Tuberculosis is the leading cause of death in the world from a single infectious disease. The problem arising due to MDR-TB requires the development of new agents that have better or a unique mechanism of action, different from the currently used. Attachment of our synthetic potential and SAR knowledge with the good antimycobacterial, antifungal, resp. cytoxicity evaluation is the aim of the project. Complete described series of novel prospective antitubercular/antifungal compounds will be the result ofour project. modeling; antitubercular; antifungal; cytotoxicity; synthesis; lipophilicity
Applications of DNA microarrays in molecular diagnostics, research and treatment of inherited metabolic disoders Applications of DNA microarrays might significantly contribute to better diagnosis, research and treatment of inherited metabolic disorders. genetic diseases; metabolism; diagnostic; molecular basis; pathogenesis; DNA microarrays; gene expression; genomics	Applications of DNA microarrays in molecular diagnostics, research and treatment of inherited metabolic disoders Applications of DNA microarrays might significantly contribute to better diagnosis, research and treatment of inherited metabolic disorders. genetic diseases; metabolism; diagnostic; molecular basis; pathogenesis; DNA microarrays; gene expression; genomics
New possibilities of diagnostics of leukemia using DNA-microarrays Using DNA microarrays, gene expression will be studied in leukemia, in control cell populations and in cell cultures. Changes will be correlated to epigenetic characteristics of chromatin at the level of its modifications (methylation, acetylation). Structural characteristics of chromatin at sites with altered expression will be studied using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), spectral microscopy and immunoFISH. Drugs with narrow spectrum of genes with altered expression wil be studied. Using advanced techniques of gene or protein visualization and top level confocal microscopy, the mechanisms of the induction and progression of leukemia will be investigated with the goal to suggest appropriate markers for diagnostics. We hope that our study ofgene expression in parallel to epigenetics will allow us to propose target molecules of effective therapy. DNA microarrays; histone modifications; inhibitors of deacetylases; chromatin structure; leukemia; histone deacetylases; epigenetics; Gleevec	New possibilities of diagnostics of leukemia using DNA-microarrays Using DNA microarrays, gene expression will be studied in leukemia, in control cell populations and in cell cultures. Changes will be correlated to epigenetic characteristics of chromatin at the level of its modifications (methylation, acetylation). Structural characteristics of chromatin at sites with altered expression will be studied using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), spectral microscopy and immunoFISH. Drugs with narrow spectrum of genes with altered expression wil be studied. Using advanced techniques of gene or protein visualization and top level confocal microscopy, the mechanisms of the induction and progression of leukemia will be investigated with the goal to suggest appropriate markers for diagnostics. We hope that our study ofgene expression in parallel to epigenetics will allow us to propose target molecules of effective therapy. DNA microarrays; histone modifications; inhibitors of deacetylases; chromatin structure; leukemia; histone deacetylases; epigenetics; Gleevec
Quantitative detection of circulating melanoma cells by real-time RT-PCR in patients treated for malignant melanoma The aim of the study is quantitative detection of circulating tumor cells in patients treated for melanoma with adjuvant therapy. A quantitative multimarker real-time RT-PCR assay will assess frequency of melanoma-specific markers from peripheral blood.Such a sensitive early-warning assay would be a particularly useful surrogate for determining which patients should be selected for more aggressive treatment protocols before the onset of clinically detectable metastatic disease. Real-time RT-PCR; Melanoma; Tumor marker; Tyrosinase; Adjuvant therapy	Quantitative detection of circulating melanoma cells by real-time RT-PCR in patients treated for malignant melanoma The aim of the study is quantitative detection of circulating tumor cells in patients treated for melanoma with adjuvant therapy. A quantitative multimarker real-time RT-PCR assay will assess frequency of melanoma-specific markers from peripheral blood.Such a sensitive early-warning assay would be a particularly useful surrogate for determining which patients should be selected for more aggressive treatment protocols before the onset of clinically detectable metastatic disease. Real-time RT-PCR; Melanoma; Tumor marker; Tyrosinase; Adjuvant therapy
Analysis of expression of STAT, JAK and SOCS in glial tumors of brain and in carcinomas of breast and prostate gland. Correlation with grading, expression of steroid receptors and expression of proteins regulating cell cycle and apoptosis. Disruption of signaling of JAK/STAT/SOCS may be the cause of failure of immune surveillance and may participate in development and invasion of various tumors, including carcinomas of prostate gland, breast and glial tumors of brain. The aim is analysis of expression of proteins JAK/STAT/SOCS in carcinomas of prostate gland, breast and in gliomas and its correlation with grading, expression of steroid receptors and proteins regulating apoptosis, proliferation and cell cycle. We suppose identification ofnew prognostic and predictive markers in glial tumors of brain and in carcinomas of breast and prostate gland. STAT; JAK; SOCS; astroglioma; cancerogenesis; mammary gland; prostate gland; prognosis	Analysis of expression of STAT, JAK and SOCS in glial tumors of brain and in carcinomas of breast and prostate gland. Correlation with grading, expression of steroid receptors and expression of proteins regulating cell cycle and apoptosis. Disruption of signaling of JAK/STAT/SOCS may be the cause of failure of immune surveillance and may participate in development and invasion of various tumors, including carcinomas of prostate gland, breast and glial tumors of brain. The aim is analysis of expression of proteins JAK/STAT/SOCS in carcinomas of prostate gland, breast and in gliomas and its correlation with grading, expression of steroid receptors and proteins regulating apoptosis, proliferation and cell cycle. We suppose identification ofnew prognostic and predictive markers in glial tumors of brain and in carcinomas of breast and prostate gland. STAT; JAK; SOCS; astroglioma; cancerogenesis; mammary gland; prostate gland; prognosis
Alteration of gene expretion and signal transduction in malignant melanoma cells. Relationship to changes of stromal micro-enviroment. The aim of the study is to analyse VEGF A,B,C and VEGFR 1,2, 3 expression, expression of factors modulating stromal environmental fenotype-PDGF, EGF, c-Myc and expression of STAT1, STAT3 and nestin in MM and stromal cells. To evaluate prognostic importance of factors mentioned above with clinical state, sentinel lymph node involvement, eventually with presence of distant metastases and with patients' survival. To correlate the results with serological prognostic marker - MIA (melanocytes inhibiting antigen). We plan to examine about 250 MM cases, 50 dysplastic pigment nevi and 100 benign nevi as a control group. Immunocytochemistry and immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis will be used for detection. melanoma; angiogenesis; microenviroment; oncogenes; transformation; fibroblasts; immunohistochemistry	Alteration of gene expretion and signal transduction in malignant melanoma cells. Relationship to changes of stromal micro-enviroment. The aim of the study is to analyse VEGF A,B,C and VEGFR 1,2, 3 expression, expression of factors modulating stromal environmental fenotype-PDGF, EGF, c-Myc and expression of STAT1, STAT3 and nestin in MM and stromal cells. To evaluate prognostic importance of factors mentioned above with clinical state, sentinel lymph node involvement, eventually with presence of distant metastases and with patients' survival. To correlate the results with serological prognostic marker - MIA (melanocytes inhibiting antigen). We plan to examine about 250 MM cases, 50 dysplastic pigment nevi and 100 benign nevi as a control group. Immunocytochemistry and immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis will be used for detection. melanoma; angiogenesis; microenviroment; oncogenes; transformation; fibroblasts; immunohistochemistry
Influence of biotransformation and transport on incidence of breast cancer and effect of chemotherapy Polymorphisms of genes of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes (XME) and their relation to incidence of non-hereditary breast cancer will be studied to identify risk individuals for more frequent and earlier examination to reveal early stages of cancer. Effects of polymorphisms of XME genes on metabolism of anticancer drugs will be studied by measuring their pharmacokinetics in plasma of patients treated for breast cancer. The aim is to find relation to success of treatment of recommend the change. Expression of ABC transporters, eliminate anticancer drugs from tumors as an important mechanism of multidrug resistance will be followed to uncover probable resistance to chemotherapy and to recommend the change of chemotherapy. The project is aimed at possibility to decrease advanced stages of breast cancer by screening of XME genetic polymorphisms as well as to contribute to improved chemotherapy in subjects with facilitated drug metabolism and transport from tumors. breast cancer; xenobiotics; anticancer; pharmacokinetics; genetics; polymorphism; biotransformation; chemotherapy	Influence of biotransformation and transport on incidence of breast cancer and effect of chemotherapy Polymorphisms of genes of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes (XME) and their relation to incidence of non-hereditary breast cancer will be studied to identify risk individuals for more frequent and earlier examination to reveal early stages of cancer. Effects of polymorphisms of XME genes on metabolism of anticancer drugs will be studied by measuring their pharmacokinetics in plasma of patients treated for breast cancer. The aim is to find relation to success of treatment of recommend the change. Expression of ABC transporters, eliminate anticancer drugs from tumors as an important mechanism of multidrug resistance will be followed to uncover probable resistance to chemotherapy and to recommend the change of chemotherapy. The project is aimed at possibility to decrease advanced stages of breast cancer by screening of XME genetic polymorphisms as well as to contribute to improved chemotherapy in subjects with facilitated drug metabolism and transport from tumors. breast cancer; xenobiotics; anticancer; pharmacokinetics; genetics; polymorphism; biotransformation; chemotherapy
Frequency and Distribution of Insulin Resistance as a Risk Factor for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Diseases Determination of simple quantitative indexes HOMA-IR and QUICKI in groups of subjects with glukose intolerance or diabetes type 2, hyperlipidemia, obesity, hypertension and combination of insulin resistance symptoms in comparison with healthy subjects .The use of simple indexes to detect early stage of insulin resistance. Determination of cut-off point, differentiating healthy subjects from subjects with insulin resistance. insulin resistance; quantitative indexes; HOMA-IR; QUICKI; early detection; epidemiologic application; prevention of diabetes type 2; prevention of CVD	Frequency and Distribution of Insulin Resistance as a Risk Factor for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Diseases Determination of simple quantitative indexes HOMA-IR and QUICKI in groups of subjects with glukose intolerance or diabetes type 2, hyperlipidemia, obesity, hypertension and combination of insulin resistance symptoms in comparison with healthy subjects .The use of simple indexes to detect early stage of insulin resistance. Determination of cut-off point, differentiating healthy subjects from subjects with insulin resistance. insulin resistance; quantitative indexes; HOMA-IR; QUICKI; early detection; epidemiologic application; prevention of diabetes type 2; prevention of CVD
End-to-side anastomosis of peripheral nerve and evaluation of neurotrophic factors influence on efficacy of functional reinnervation Clinical and experimental study of end-to-side neurorrhaphy of peripheral nerves. Significance of end-to-side anastomosis in reconstruction of brachial plexus injury. Evaluation of influence of some neurotrophic factors on collateral reinnervation following end-to-side anastomosis of peripheral nerves in experimental model. Brachial plexus; end-to-side anastomosis; neurotrophic factors; collateral reineravation	End-to-side anastomosis of peripheral nerve and evaluation of neurotrophic factors influence on efficacy of functional reinnervation Clinical and experimental study of end-to-side neurorrhaphy of peripheral nerves. Significance of end-to-side anastomosis in reconstruction of brachial plexus injury. Evaluation of influence of some neurotrophic factors on collateral reinnervation following end-to-side anastomosis of peripheral nerves in experimental model. Brachial plexus; end-to-side anastomosis; neurotrophic factors; collateral reineravation
13 Years of Age as Meaningful Milestone in Childrens´Life - Epidemiologic Study The observed children will be investigated at the age of 13.The object of the study: health status and its determinants. Method: peadiatric, anthropologic and psychologic investigations of children, documentation from health facilities, questionnaires for schools. Processing the injury rate, morbidity and some parametres of lifestyle and influence of environment. injury rate; morbidity; environment; lifestyle; smoking; health determinants; longitudinality; psychosocial aspects	13 Years of Age as Meaningful Milestone in Childrens´Life - Epidemiologic Study The observed children will be investigated at the age of 13.The object of the study: health status and its determinants. Method: peadiatric, anthropologic and psychologic investigations of children, documentation from health facilities, questionnaires for schools. Processing the injury rate, morbidity and some parametres of lifestyle and influence of environment. injury rate; morbidity; environment; lifestyle; smoking; health determinants; longitudinality; psychosocial aspects
Detection of mutations in the GDAP1, LITAF, PRX and NEFL genes as newly discovered possible causes of inherited neuropaties Charcot-Marie-Tooth - extended investigation in the large cohort of at least 300 Czech families without the most common mutations. To continue the long term project of elucidation of possible causes of inherited peripheral neuropathies by the extended analysis of recently discovered candidate genes - mainly LITAF, GDAP1, PRX and NEFL in a large previously collected cohort of at least 300 Czech Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease families with already excluded main mutations - CMT1A duplication/ HNPP deletion, Cx32, MPZ and PMP22 gene mutations. Charcot-Marie-Tooth; GDAP1; NEFL; LITAF1; PRX; HMSN; myelin; axon	Detection of mutations in the GDAP1, LITAF, PRX and NEFL genes as newly discovered possible causes of inherited neuropaties Charcot-Marie-Tooth - extended investigation in the large cohort of at least 300 Czech families without the most common mutations. To continue the long term project of elucidation of possible causes of inherited peripheral neuropathies by the extended analysis of recently discovered candidate genes - mainly LITAF, GDAP1, PRX and NEFL in a large previously collected cohort of at least 300 Czech Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease families with already excluded main mutations - CMT1A duplication/ HNPP deletion, Cx32, MPZ and PMP22 gene mutations. Charcot-Marie-Tooth; GDAP1; NEFL; LITAF1; PRX; HMSN; myelin; axon
Multiresistant bacterial strains in livestock breeding - occurrence, spread possibilities, assessing risks for the human population health status and protecting the human food chain To define multiresistant bacterial strains in livestock breeding, to assess risks of transmission into human population by foods of animal origin (meat and meat products, milk and dairy products) and by livestock breeding personnel. Analysing DNA, and resistance genes in multiresistant bacterial strains from the biological material from human population (both community and hospital setting), livestock and animal-origin foods; creating a hypothesis about strain source and spread. To define the impact ofthe selection pressure of antibiotics (namely large-scale medication) in animals kept for food production (cattle, pigs, poultry) on the occurrence of multiresistant bacteria. Creating guidelines for veterinary antibiotics policy aiming at minimizing theoccurrence of multiresistant bacteria in livestock breeding and decreasing health risks for human population. human population; livestock breeding; food chain; multiresistant bacteria; bacterial genom analysis; health protection	Multiresistant bacterial strains in livestock breeding - occurrence, spread possibilities, assessing risks for the human population health status and protecting the human food chain To define multiresistant bacterial strains in livestock breeding, to assess risks of transmission into human population by foods of animal origin (meat and meat products, milk and dairy products) and by livestock breeding personnel. Analysing DNA, and resistance genes in multiresistant bacterial strains from the biological material from human population (both community and hospital setting), livestock and animal-origin foods; creating a hypothesis about strain source and spread. To define the impact ofthe selection pressure of antibiotics (namely large-scale medication) in animals kept for food production (cattle, pigs, poultry) on the occurrence of multiresistant bacteria. Creating guidelines for veterinary antibiotics policy aiming at minimizing theoccurrence of multiresistant bacteria in livestock breeding and decreasing health risks for human population. human population; livestock breeding; food chain; multiresistant bacteria; bacterial genom analysis; health protection
Development of real-time PCR for the detection of DNA Chlamydia trachomatis and Chlamydia pneuminae. Development of competitive quantitative real-time PCR method for detection of C.trachomatis and C.pneumoniae DNAs, Generation of external and internal standards by cloning selected DNA fragments into bacterial plasmids Validation of the method (determination of sensitivity and specificity) and evaluation of diagnostic efficiency, based on testing of the defined panels of clinical samples Chlamydia trachomatis; Chlamydia pneumoniae; Diagnosis; Infectious diseases; Real-time PCR	Development of real-time PCR for the detection of DNA Chlamydia trachomatis and Chlamydia pneuminae. Development of competitive quantitative real-time PCR method for detection of C.trachomatis and C.pneumoniae DNAs, Generation of external and internal standards by cloning selected DNA fragments into bacterial plasmids Validation of the method (determination of sensitivity and specificity) and evaluation of diagnostic efficiency, based on testing of the defined panels of clinical samples Chlamydia trachomatis; Chlamydia pneumoniae; Diagnosis; Infectious diseases; Real-time PCR
Following occurrence heparin resistance near population ill before operation heart in extra-corporeal circulation By means of ACT, to establish the percentage of incidence of heparin resistance in patients operated in the extracorporeal circulation. By means of examination of antithrombin III level, to find out the real influence on heparin resistance in patients operated in the extracorporeal circulation. To find out the influence of pre-operational application of heparin on the incidence of heparin resistance. To establish the dosage of heparin, and thus to reduce the undesirable effects and post-operational complications. Heprin resistance; Antitrombin III; Extra-corporeal Circulation; Heparin; Protamin; Operation heart	Following occurrence heparin resistance near population ill before operation heart in extra-corporeal circulation By means of ACT, to establish the percentage of incidence of heparin resistance in patients operated in the extracorporeal circulation. By means of examination of antithrombin III level, to find out the real influence on heparin resistance in patients operated in the extracorporeal circulation. To find out the influence of pre-operational application of heparin on the incidence of heparin resistance. To establish the dosage of heparin, and thus to reduce the undesirable effects and post-operational complications. Heprin resistance; Antitrombin III; Extra-corporeal Circulation; Heparin; Protamin; Operation heart
Postmortem analysis of the group of patients treated with implantable electronic medical devices The cause of death in arrhythmic patients with implantable device can differ according to the type of the device. The noncardiac causes of death in patients with PM will be outnumber the cardiac ones. There will be more cardiac causes of death in patients with ICD to them noncardiac ones. The postmortem examination of the implanted system will help to eliminate the dysfunction of the system as the cause of death. The analysis of causes of death of these patients can improve arrhythmic patients care in the future. pacemaker; ICD; autopsy; causes of death	Postmortem analysis of the group of patients treated with implantable electronic medical devices The cause of death in arrhythmic patients with implantable device can differ according to the type of the device. The noncardiac causes of death in patients with PM will be outnumber the cardiac ones. There will be more cardiac causes of death in patients with ICD to them noncardiac ones. The postmortem examination of the implanted system will help to eliminate the dysfunction of the system as the cause of death. The analysis of causes of death of these patients can improve arrhythmic patients care in the future. pacemaker; ICD; autopsy; causes of death
Modern neurophysiological methods for diagnostics and follow-up examinations in dementia Clinical data of the patients with dementia will be correlated with the results of objective examinations(CT,MRI,conventional EEG analysis and advanced quantitative EEG analysis)to elaborate a rational procedure for diagnostics and therapeutic follow-up. dementia; EEG analysis; EEG spectrum; EEG cordance; EEG tomography (LORETA); cognitive drugs	Modern neurophysiological methods for diagnostics and follow-up examinations in dementia Clinical data of the patients with dementia will be correlated with the results of objective examinations(CT,MRI,conventional EEG analysis and advanced quantitative EEG analysis)to elaborate a rational procedure for diagnostics and therapeutic follow-up. dementia; EEG analysis; EEG spectrum; EEG cordance; EEG tomography (LORETA); cognitive drugs
Acute myocardial infarction in young patients Acute myocardial infarction affects young individuals. Aetiology of coronary artery occlusion is different as in the older population. Detailed screening and influecing of risk factors is the most important part of long-term therapy of these patients. Project is proposed for establishment and long-term monitoring of group of young survivors after acute myocardial infarction or with premature manifestation of ischemic heart disease. The goal is to improve long-term prognosis and contribute in research. myocardial infarction; young patients; genetic risk; thrombophilia; long-term prognosis; primary angioplasty	Acute myocardial infarction in young patients Acute myocardial infarction affects young individuals. Aetiology of coronary artery occlusion is different as in the older population. Detailed screening and influecing of risk factors is the most important part of long-term therapy of these patients. Project is proposed for establishment and long-term monitoring of group of young survivors after acute myocardial infarction or with premature manifestation of ischemic heart disease. The goal is to improve long-term prognosis and contribute in research. myocardial infarction; young patients; genetic risk; thrombophilia; long-term prognosis; primary angioplasty
Screening of cardiovascular diseases in hospitalised patients with special attention to neurohumoral activation and prognosis in heart failure and myocardial infarction A new registry of patients (n = 20 000) hospitalized on a cardiological de-partment within 4-5 years will be formed. The most frequent cardiological and noncardiological diagnosis and its combination will be evaluated. Left ventricle function and neurohumoral activation in patients with acute and chronic heart failure will be measured (n = 4 500). Systolic and diastolic func-tion and neurohumoral activation as a long term prognostic marker will be followed (n = 3 000). The pharmacological and nopharmacological treatment of acute myocardial infarction (n = 1 600), chronic heart failure (n = 3 000) and hypertension (n = 8 000) will be recorded and these results will be compared with some earlier data of the investigator. The differences in pharmacological and nopharmacological treatment with regard to age and concomitant diseases, mainly diabetes mellitus renal insuffi-ciency will be followed. The prognostic value of these parameters will be tested. Cardiovascular diseases; Heart failure; Myocardial infection; Hypertension; prognosis; mortality; morbidity; neurohumoral activacion	Screening of cardiovascular diseases in hospitalised patients with special attention to neurohumoral activation and prognosis in heart failure and myocardial infarction A new registry of patients (n = 20 000) hospitalized on a cardiological de-partment within 4-5 years will be formed. The most frequent cardiological and noncardiological diagnosis and its combination will be evaluated. Left ventricle function and neurohumoral activation in patients with acute and chronic heart failure will be measured (n = 4 500). Systolic and diastolic func-tion and neurohumoral activation as a long term prognostic marker will be followed (n = 3 000). The pharmacological and nopharmacological treatment of acute myocardial infarction (n = 1 600), chronic heart failure (n = 3 000) and hypertension (n = 8 000) will be recorded and these results will be compared with some earlier data of the investigator. The differences in pharmacological and nopharmacological treatment with regard to age and concomitant diseases, mainly diabetes mellitus renal insuffi-ciency will be followed. The prognostic value of these parameters will be tested. Cardiovascular diseases; Heart failure; Myocardial infection; Hypertension; prognosis; mortality; morbidity; neurohumoral activacion
Molecular aspects of diagnostics and therapy of spinal muscular atrophy Spinal muscular atrophy is autosomal-recessive disease caused in ca. 95% of cases by homozygous deletion of the SMN1 gene. The SMN1 gene and its SMN2 copy localise to chromosome 5q13. Differences between SMN1 and SMN2 result in different splicing. Transcription and splicing of the SMN1 gene results in full-length mRNA in about 70%, while about the same fraction of SMN2 products shows deletion of the exon 7. Compounds affecting SMN mRNA splicing towards exon 7 inclusion could be used in therapy. The project expands SMA diagnostics by detection of point mutations (ca.5% of SMA cases are caused by SMN1 deletion at one chromosome and point mutation at the other), evaluation of copy no. of SMN2 and correlation of the copy no. and disease phenotype. The project goal is to analyse changes in SMN2 expression at the mRNA and protein level in lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from SMA patients, cultivated with or without phenylbutyrate, i.e., the compound affecting mRNA splicing. spinal muscular atrophy; SMA; SMN1; SMN2; phenylbutyrate; real-time PCR; lymphoblastoid cell lines; mRNA splicing	Molecular aspects of diagnostics and therapy of spinal muscular atrophy Spinal muscular atrophy is autosomal-recessive disease caused in ca. 95% of cases by homozygous deletion of the SMN1 gene. The SMN1 gene and its SMN2 copy localise to chromosome 5q13. Differences between SMN1 and SMN2 result in different splicing. Transcription and splicing of the SMN1 gene results in full-length mRNA in about 70%, while about the same fraction of SMN2 products shows deletion of the exon 7. Compounds affecting SMN mRNA splicing towards exon 7 inclusion could be used in therapy. The project expands SMA diagnostics by detection of point mutations (ca.5% of SMA cases are caused by SMN1 deletion at one chromosome and point mutation at the other), evaluation of copy no. of SMN2 and correlation of the copy no. and disease phenotype. The project goal is to analyse changes in SMN2 expression at the mRNA and protein level in lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from SMA patients, cultivated with or without phenylbutyrate, i.e., the compound affecting mRNA splicing. spinal muscular atrophy; SMA; SMN1; SMN2; phenylbutyrate; real-time PCR; lymphoblastoid cell lines; mRNA splicing
Factors affecting healthy development of progeny of drug-abusing mothers Experimental study of long-term changes after chronic methamphetamine application, the most common drug in the Czech Reublic. Differentiation of the extent of drug effect and the extent of the effect of postnatal care and breeding on individual during development. Investigation of the extent of drug effect per se in comparison to the effect of prenatal stress. drug; methamphetamine; breeding; stress; behavior; pain; cognition; seizures	Factors affecting healthy development of progeny of drug-abusing mothers Experimental study of long-term changes after chronic methamphetamine application, the most common drug in the Czech Reublic. Differentiation of the extent of drug effect and the extent of the effect of postnatal care and breeding on individual during development. Investigation of the extent of drug effect per se in comparison to the effect of prenatal stress. drug; methamphetamine; breeding; stress; behavior; pain; cognition; seizures
Diagnosis of pancreatic tumors by linear endosonography guided biopsy Pancreatic carcinoma is a serious disease,which is mostly diagnosed late and has a bad prognosis. To distinguish carcinoma and pancreatic inflammation is diagnostic and a therapeutical problem.EUS guided biopsy may improve this diagnostic process. The aim of our study is to performe EUS giuded biopsy( US- FNA) in patients with focal pancreatic lesion who are indicated for surgery. In these patients the surgery will be done and resected tissue will be sent for histology exam. The result of histology willbe compared to result of EUS giuded biopsy. The aim of our project is to prove the high sensitivity and specificity EU guided biopsy in patients with focal pancreatic lesions. focal pancreatic lesion; radial EUS; ERCP; laparotomy; EUS quided biopsy; linear EUS; CT scans; histology	Diagnosis of pancreatic tumors by linear endosonography guided biopsy Pancreatic carcinoma is a serious disease,which is mostly diagnosed late and has a bad prognosis. To distinguish carcinoma and pancreatic inflammation is diagnostic and a therapeutical problem.EUS guided biopsy may improve this diagnostic process. The aim of our study is to performe EUS giuded biopsy( US- FNA) in patients with focal pancreatic lesion who are indicated for surgery. In these patients the surgery will be done and resected tissue will be sent for histology exam. The result of histology willbe compared to result of EUS giuded biopsy. The aim of our project is to prove the high sensitivity and specificity EU guided biopsy in patients with focal pancreatic lesions. focal pancreatic lesion; radial EUS; ERCP; laparotomy; EUS quided biopsy; linear EUS; CT scans; histology
Using of M2A endoscopic wireless capsule for diagnosis of obscure gastrointestinal bleeding Use of M2A endocopis capsule in patient with recidive of gastrointestinal bleeding and comparation with the enteroscopy. Use of M2A endocopis capsule in patient with recidive of gastrointestinal bleeding and comparation with the enteroscopy. Finding thesource of gastrointestinal bleeding enables to decide about the next suitable treatment. From our point of view, using of M2A capsule is safe and comfortable for the patient. M2A Endoscopic Capsule; Gastrointestinal bleeding; Enteroscopy; Economic Benefit; Unknown source of bleeding	Using of M2A endoscopic wireless capsule for diagnosis of obscure gastrointestinal bleeding Use of M2A endocopis capsule in patient with recidive of gastrointestinal bleeding and comparation with the enteroscopy. Use of M2A endocopis capsule in patient with recidive of gastrointestinal bleeding and comparation with the enteroscopy. Finding thesource of gastrointestinal bleeding enables to decide about the next suitable treatment. From our point of view, using of M2A capsule is safe and comfortable for the patient. M2A Endoscopic Capsule; Gastrointestinal bleeding; Enteroscopy; Economic Benefit; Unknown source of bleeding
Oxidative stress in pathophysiology of male infertility. Implementation of measurement of oxidative stress into the routine diagnostics of male factor infertility. Determination of chosen species of ROS/RNS in spermatozoa; discrimination of cell origin of chosen ROS by flow-cytometry. Evaluation of the effectof antioxidant therapy using lycopene on the total antioxidant capacity of blood and seminal plasma. The evaluation of the psychical discomfort and influence of psychological couselling. male infertility; oxidative stress; sperm morphology; flow-cytometry; ROS; TAC; antioxidants; personality psychology	Oxidative stress in pathophysiology of male infertility. Implementation of measurement of oxidative stress into the routine diagnostics of male factor infertility. Determination of chosen species of ROS/RNS in spermatozoa; discrimination of cell origin of chosen ROS by flow-cytometry. Evaluation of the effectof antioxidant therapy using lycopene on the total antioxidant capacity of blood and seminal plasma. The evaluation of the psychical discomfort and influence of psychological couselling. male infertility; oxidative stress; sperm morphology; flow-cytometry; ROS; TAC; antioxidants; personality psychology
Video-assisted talo-calcaneal arthrodesis of pes valgus in cerebral palsy. Video-assisted talo-calcaneal arthrodesis using a synthetic bone substitute (beta-tricalcium-phosphate) in conjunction with mini-invasive talo-calcaneal stabilisation by a cannulated screw. video-assisted; talo-calcaneal; arthrodesis; Pes; valgus; Cerebral; palsy	Video-assisted talo-calcaneal arthrodesis of pes valgus in cerebral palsy. Video-assisted talo-calcaneal arthrodesis using a synthetic bone substitute (beta-tricalcium-phosphate) in conjunction with mini-invasive talo-calcaneal stabilisation by a cannulated screw. video-assisted; talo-calcaneal; arthrodesis; Pes; valgus; Cerebral; palsy
The use of plasticity of the central nervous system in neurorehabilitation of multiple sclerosis people The aim of this study is to prove that neuro-rehabilitation in multiple sclerosis causes the adaptation and reorganization of the central nervous system function on the system basis, which is supposed to result in brain activity changes measured by fMRI.The aim of this study is to find out whether brain activity changes are related to clinical parameters changes and if so, then in what way. The aim of this study is to find out whether brain activity changes are related to the structural brain damage and if so, then in what way. multiple sclerosis; plasticity; adaptability; fMRI; neurorehabilitation; central nervous system	The use of plasticity of the central nervous system in neurorehabilitation of multiple sclerosis people The aim of this study is to prove that neuro-rehabilitation in multiple sclerosis causes the adaptation and reorganization of the central nervous system function on the system basis, which is supposed to result in brain activity changes measured by fMRI.The aim of this study is to find out whether brain activity changes are related to clinical parameters changes and if so, then in what way. The aim of this study is to find out whether brain activity changes are related to the structural brain damage and if so, then in what way. multiple sclerosis; plasticity; adaptability; fMRI; neurorehabilitation; central nervous system
The use of deep-brain stimulation in treatment of Parkinson's disease and movement disorders The projects aims to develop methods and indications of deep-brain stimulation (DBS) in Parkinson's disease and other movement disorders that cannot be controlled by classical pharmacotherapy. The effects of DBS on on motor and non-motor brain functionswill be studied. Neurophysiological studies and functional imaging will contribute to general understanding of the basal ganglia role in motor control and mental regulation. The project will improve health related quality of life in a specific populationgroup. It will allow to evaluate the functional, socio- and pharmacoeconomical effects of DBS and contribute to rationalization of the medical care. deep-brain stimulation; movement disorders; Parkinson's disease; dystonia; tremor; basal ganglia; functional magnetic resonance; stereotaxis	The use of deep-brain stimulation in treatment of Parkinson's disease and movement disorders The projects aims to develop methods and indications of deep-brain stimulation (DBS) in Parkinson's disease and other movement disorders that cannot be controlled by classical pharmacotherapy. The effects of DBS on on motor and non-motor brain functionswill be studied. Neurophysiological studies and functional imaging will contribute to general understanding of the basal ganglia role in motor control and mental regulation. The project will improve health related quality of life in a specific populationgroup. It will allow to evaluate the functional, socio- and pharmacoeconomical effects of DBS and contribute to rationalization of the medical care. deep-brain stimulation; movement disorders; Parkinson's disease; dystonia; tremor; basal ganglia; functional magnetic resonance; stereotaxis
Sequence of peptides eluted from HLA-B27 molecules in healthy and diseased individuals PBL will be isolated from human blood and peptides will be eluted from B27 molecules of AS patients and healthy control. The peptide profiles will be compared by MALDI-TOF and Edman degradation for pool sequencing. PBL will be isolated from human blood and peptides will be eluted from B27 molecules of AS patients and healthy control.Individual peptides will be sequenced by LC/MS and Q-FTMS. Pools of PBL obtained from several AS diseased and healthy individuals will be tested to examine which individualpeptide appears as different,and thus exert a strong representation. Method used for the analysis of individual peptides will be MALDI-TOF. Peptide profiles will be examined from spleen cells of B27 transgenic mice with the ANKENT enthesopathy disease and healthy controls. The overall results will be compared with those obtained from AS patients. Autoimmunity; HLA-B27; Peptides; AS	Sequence of peptides eluted from HLA-B27 molecules in healthy and diseased individuals PBL will be isolated from human blood and peptides will be eluted from B27 molecules of AS patients and healthy control. The peptide profiles will be compared by MALDI-TOF and Edman degradation for pool sequencing. PBL will be isolated from human blood and peptides will be eluted from B27 molecules of AS patients and healthy control.Individual peptides will be sequenced by LC/MS and Q-FTMS. Pools of PBL obtained from several AS diseased and healthy individuals will be tested to examine which individualpeptide appears as different,and thus exert a strong representation. Method used for the analysis of individual peptides will be MALDI-TOF. Peptide profiles will be examined from spleen cells of B27 transgenic mice with the ANKENT enthesopathy disease and healthy controls. The overall results will be compared with those obtained from AS patients. Autoimmunity; HLA-B27; Peptides; AS
Developmental Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacogenetic Aspects of Analgesic Sedation by Tramadol in Newborns, Infants and Older Children Treated at the Intensive Care Unit The aim of the study is to describe if maturation of biotransformation pathways changes pharmacokinetic parameters of tramadol and wheather the genetic polymorphism of CYP2D6 influences this develpmental variability. We will also evaluate the clinical effects of the drug during therapy and after its discontinuation and corelate the clinical data with the pharmacokinetic parameters in separate groups of patients. Optimally, two hundred and forty children will be included into the study. The patients willbe evaluated in groups with respect to their age and genotype of CYP2D6. analgosedation; tramadol; developmental pharmacokinetics; pharmacodynamics; CYP2D6; pharmacogenetics; metabolism	Developmental Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacogenetic Aspects of Analgesic Sedation by Tramadol in Newborns, Infants and Older Children Treated at the Intensive Care Unit The aim of the study is to describe if maturation of biotransformation pathways changes pharmacokinetic parameters of tramadol and wheather the genetic polymorphism of CYP2D6 influences this develpmental variability. We will also evaluate the clinical effects of the drug during therapy and after its discontinuation and corelate the clinical data with the pharmacokinetic parameters in separate groups of patients. Optimally, two hundred and forty children will be included into the study. The patients willbe evaluated in groups with respect to their age and genotype of CYP2D6. analgosedation; tramadol; developmental pharmacokinetics; pharmacodynamics; CYP2D6; pharmacogenetics; metabolism
Development of new methods for determination of vitamin D metabolites in biological material. Developing and validation of method for determination of circulating endogenous vitamin D hydroxylated metabolites using immunochemical and chromatographic techniques with UV or fluorimetric detection of native or derivatized analytes. Determination of circulating vitamin D hydroxylated metabolites in children with serious renal failure (200 sample per year) and in patients with defective bone remodeling (200 samples). vitamin D; metabolites; chromatography; immunoassay; derivatization; determination	Development of new methods for determination of vitamin D metabolites in biological material. Developing and validation of method for determination of circulating endogenous vitamin D hydroxylated metabolites using immunochemical and chromatographic techniques with UV or fluorimetric detection of native or derivatized analytes. Determination of circulating vitamin D hydroxylated metabolites in children with serious renal failure (200 sample per year) and in patients with defective bone remodeling (200 samples). vitamin D; metabolites; chromatography; immunoassay; derivatization; determination
Neurosteroids - a risk factors of some brain diseases? We will determine the activities of steroidogenic enzymes (mainly sulfatase and sulfotransferase) in human brain tumorous tissues obtained during necessary surgical operation. Moreover we will determine spectrum of neurosteroids and aminothiols. We willtry to find the differences in the spectrum and concentrations of neurosteroids and aminothiols in dependance on the type of the brain disease. neurosteroids; brain; neoplasia; homocysteine; steroidogenic; enzyme; deuterium	Neurosteroids - a risk factors of some brain diseases? We will determine the activities of steroidogenic enzymes (mainly sulfatase and sulfotransferase) in human brain tumorous tissues obtained during necessary surgical operation. Moreover we will determine spectrum of neurosteroids and aminothiols. We willtry to find the differences in the spectrum and concentrations of neurosteroids and aminothiols in dependance on the type of the brain disease. neurosteroids; brain; neoplasia; homocysteine; steroidogenic; enzyme; deuterium
Influence of Selenium Upon Health Status of Seniors Elimination of Se deficit might have health consequences in decrease of infections, chronic inflammations and various oxidative diseased by the mechanisms of increased antioxidative capacities of selenoenzymes and improved immune response. Especially seniors suffer from Se deficiency and just people in old age the most often fall ill with this type of disease (bacterial and viral inflammations, arthrosis, cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases). This project suggests 4 years' monitoring of the health status and changes of selected physiological and biochemical parameters of 150 old persons with optimalized Se status and comparison of the results with health status of 150 seniors with placebo. Application of results might increase life quality ofelderly by improving their health as well as physical and mental status, extend lifespan in the CR, and spare money by prevention of serious diseases and their more effective treatment. Se supplementation; pGPx; state of health; infections; thyroid hormones; lipids; essential trace elements; immunity	Influence of Selenium Upon Health Status of Seniors Elimination of Se deficit might have health consequences in decrease of infections, chronic inflammations and various oxidative diseased by the mechanisms of increased antioxidative capacities of selenoenzymes and improved immune response. Especially seniors suffer from Se deficiency and just people in old age the most often fall ill with this type of disease (bacterial and viral inflammations, arthrosis, cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases). This project suggests 4 years' monitoring of the health status and changes of selected physiological and biochemical parameters of 150 old persons with optimalized Se status and comparison of the results with health status of 150 seniors with placebo. Application of results might increase life quality ofelderly by improving their health as well as physical and mental status, extend lifespan in the CR, and spare money by prevention of serious diseases and their more effective treatment. Se supplementation; pGPx; state of health; infections; thyroid hormones; lipids; essential trace elements; immunity
Relationships of steroid metabolism to the patogenesis and treatment of epilepsy Epilepsy is connected with disturbances in reproductive functions. Some antiepileptic drugs as the epilepsy status induce the development of reproductive endocrinopathies influencing at least the course of epilepsy. Some circulating steroids surpass theblood-brain barrier. They bind to intraculular receptors and, together with locally produced steroids, modulate also the ionotropic membrane receptors of neuronal cells influencing the neuronal activity. We will concentrate on the changes in steroid biosynhesis in patients with epilepsy after treatment with antiepileptic drugs in a complete metabolic pathway from pregnenolone sulfate and pregnenolone up to active hormones. We will follow the effect of antiepilptic drugs on steroidogenesis in the 5-en pathway as on their neuroprotective 7-hydroxy- metabolites, pregnane and androstane neuroactive steroids and the balance between free steroids and sulfates. epilepsy; catamenial epilepsy; antiepileptic drugs; steroids; neuroactive steroids; neuroprotective steroids; polycystic ovary syndrome; steroid metabolism	Relationships of steroid metabolism to the patogenesis and treatment of epilepsy Epilepsy is connected with disturbances in reproductive functions. Some antiepileptic drugs as the epilepsy status induce the development of reproductive endocrinopathies influencing at least the course of epilepsy. Some circulating steroids surpass theblood-brain barrier. They bind to intraculular receptors and, together with locally produced steroids, modulate also the ionotropic membrane receptors of neuronal cells influencing the neuronal activity. We will concentrate on the changes in steroid biosynhesis in patients with epilepsy after treatment with antiepileptic drugs in a complete metabolic pathway from pregnenolone sulfate and pregnenolone up to active hormones. We will follow the effect of antiepilptic drugs on steroidogenesis in the 5-en pathway as on their neuroprotective 7-hydroxy- metabolites, pregnane and androstane neuroactive steroids and the balance between free steroids and sulfates. epilepsy; catamenial epilepsy; antiepileptic drugs; steroids; neuroactive steroids; neuroprotective steroids; polycystic ovary syndrome; steroid metabolism
New markers of development of colorectal carcinoma in ulcerative colitis patients Quantification of genes responsible to inflammation and carcinogenesis Correlation of some genes expression to clinical and morphology of ulcerative colitis Cascade of chronic inflammation-dysplasia-colorectal carcinoma in experimental model ulcerative colitis; colorectal carcinoma; dysplasia; inflammation markers; neoplasia markers; experimental models of colitis; colitis with carcinoma model	New markers of development of colorectal carcinoma in ulcerative colitis patients Quantification of genes responsible to inflammation and carcinogenesis Correlation of some genes expression to clinical and morphology of ulcerative colitis Cascade of chronic inflammation-dysplasia-colorectal carcinoma in experimental model ulcerative colitis; colorectal carcinoma; dysplasia; inflammation markers; neoplasia markers; experimental models of colitis; colitis with carcinoma model
Theophyllin in prevention of contrast induced nephropathy, randomised trial In patients with elevated creatinine, administration of contrast can cause impairment of renal function. This project is based on hypothesis as follows: intravenous theophylline administration prior to invasive procedure can prevent renal impairment. Primary endpoint: statistically and clinically significant reduction of plasma creatinine increase at 24 and 48 hours after coronary angiography or angioplasty in active group /200 mg of theophylline prior to procedure/ in comparison with placebo group. Secondary endpoint: comparison of incidence of contrast induced nephropathy / increase of plasma creatinine level by 44.2 umol/l / in both study groups on condition that adequate hydratation of all patients is provided. Effective prevention of contrast media induced renal impairment could significantly decrease morbidity of patients with renal failure scheduled for transcatheter or surgical myocardial revascularisation. nephropathy; coronary; angiography; angioplasty; prevention; theophylline; contrast	Theophyllin in prevention of contrast induced nephropathy, randomised trial In patients with elevated creatinine, administration of contrast can cause impairment of renal function. This project is based on hypothesis as follows: intravenous theophylline administration prior to invasive procedure can prevent renal impairment. Primary endpoint: statistically and clinically significant reduction of plasma creatinine increase at 24 and 48 hours after coronary angiography or angioplasty in active group /200 mg of theophylline prior to procedure/ in comparison with placebo group. Secondary endpoint: comparison of incidence of contrast induced nephropathy / increase of plasma creatinine level by 44.2 umol/l / in both study groups on condition that adequate hydratation of all patients is provided. Effective prevention of contrast media induced renal impairment could significantly decrease morbidity of patients with renal failure scheduled for transcatheter or surgical myocardial revascularisation. nephropathy; coronary; angiography; angioplasty; prevention; theophylline; contrast
New Possibilities of TDM of Cyclosporine A and its Metabolites after kidney transplantation Cyklosporin A (CsA) is the major imunossupresive drug for organ transplantations. Optimal immunossupresive effect so as reduction of adverse effects is done through terapeutic monitoring of CsA levels (TDM). Methods used for estimation of CsA level in blood are not sufficiently specific and cross reactions with CsA metabolites cause significant differences to compare with real levels. Developed HPLC metod can analyse CsA and main metabolites AM1, AM9, AM4N. This metod was used for TDM in blood and in lymphocytes as the target organ of immunossuprese. Aim of our investigation is to compare TDM CsA and its metabolits in C through, C2 and AUC in blood and in lymphcytes during long time administration. New renal transplant patients will be observed (25/year)and so as pacients long term stable (300). Correlation TDM, clinical status and markers of immunosuppression (IL-2,IMG) could find, whether TDM in lymphocytes is more convenient than TDM in blood. cyclosporine; metabolites; transplantation; lymphocytes; TDM; LC-MS; RIA; rejection	New Possibilities of TDM of Cyclosporine A and its Metabolites after kidney transplantation Cyklosporin A (CsA) is the major imunossupresive drug for organ transplantations. Optimal immunossupresive effect so as reduction of adverse effects is done through terapeutic monitoring of CsA levels (TDM). Methods used for estimation of CsA level in blood are not sufficiently specific and cross reactions with CsA metabolites cause significant differences to compare with real levels. Developed HPLC metod can analyse CsA and main metabolites AM1, AM9, AM4N. This metod was used for TDM in blood and in lymphocytes as the target organ of immunossuprese. Aim of our investigation is to compare TDM CsA and its metabolits in C through, C2 and AUC in blood and in lymphcytes during long time administration. New renal transplant patients will be observed (25/year)and so as pacients long term stable (300). Correlation TDM, clinical status and markers of immunosuppression (IL-2,IMG) could find, whether TDM in lymphocytes is more convenient than TDM in blood. cyclosporine; metabolites; transplantation; lymphocytes; TDM; LC-MS; RIA; rejection
Verification of antidiabetic effect of ethnobotanicaly important herbal medicines The antidiabetic activity of selected herbal drugs and extracts, used in traditional medicine will be experimentally verified. The active extract will underwent the fractionation process and active constituents will be isolated. The methods for standardization of content and activity of several herbal drugs and extracts will be developed. The aim of the study is obtaining of verified experimental data about the proposed antidiabetic activity of selected medicinal plants. diabetes; antidiabetics; ethnopharmacology; alloxan	Verification of antidiabetic effect of ethnobotanicaly important herbal medicines The antidiabetic activity of selected herbal drugs and extracts, used in traditional medicine will be experimentally verified. The active extract will underwent the fractionation process and active constituents will be isolated. The methods for standardization of content and activity of several herbal drugs and extracts will be developed. The aim of the study is obtaining of verified experimental data about the proposed antidiabetic activity of selected medicinal plants. diabetes; antidiabetics; ethnopharmacology; alloxan
Testing olfaction with focus on workers in the chemical factory The smell ability will be evaluated using currently used and standardised olfactory tests and compared with test using perfumed markers. The olfaction will be tested in people who work in chemical factories and compared with group of people who will consider themselves as normosmics and will not suffer disease which could influence smell ability. The smell will be tested in the group of multiple scelrosis patients treated in neurology. The olfaction will be tested in people over 60 years of age who takeantihypertensive drugs and compared with group of subjects of the same age but without antihypertensive medication. olfaction; olfactometry; Sniffin´ sticks; UPSIT; chemical factory; multiple sclerosis; antihypertensive drugs; pefumed markers	Testing olfaction with focus on workers in the chemical factory The smell ability will be evaluated using currently used and standardised olfactory tests and compared with test using perfumed markers. The olfaction will be tested in people who work in chemical factories and compared with group of people who will consider themselves as normosmics and will not suffer disease which could influence smell ability. The smell will be tested in the group of multiple scelrosis patients treated in neurology. The olfaction will be tested in people over 60 years of age who takeantihypertensive drugs and compared with group of subjects of the same age but without antihypertensive medication. olfaction; olfactometry; Sniffin´ sticks; UPSIT; chemical factory; multiple sclerosis; antihypertensive drugs; pefumed markers
Pharmacokinetics of gentamicin, dosage prediction in term and preterm neonates The kinetic guided strategy of dosage prediction of gentamicin (GE) in neonates is suggested. Using Bayesian methods (MV-Pharm) individual pharmacokinetic parameters of GE will be estimated after a dose 1. After a dose 3 and 4, the dosage prediction willbe checked and dosage adjustment performed according to the patient´s need. Factors (covariates) contributing to interindividual differences in GE kinetics will be defined. The incidence of hypocalcaemia, hypomagnaesemia, hyperphosphataemia after GE andits relation to nephrocalcinosis will be analyzed. aminoglycosides; gentamicin; term neonates; preterm neonates; 1st month of the postnatal age; dosage prediction; nephrotoxicity; hypocalcaemia	Pharmacokinetics of gentamicin, dosage prediction in term and preterm neonates The kinetic guided strategy of dosage prediction of gentamicin (GE) in neonates is suggested. Using Bayesian methods (MV-Pharm) individual pharmacokinetic parameters of GE will be estimated after a dose 1. After a dose 3 and 4, the dosage prediction willbe checked and dosage adjustment performed according to the patient´s need. Factors (covariates) contributing to interindividual differences in GE kinetics will be defined. The incidence of hypocalcaemia, hypomagnaesemia, hyperphosphataemia after GE andits relation to nephrocalcinosis will be analyzed. aminoglycosides; gentamicin; term neonates; preterm neonates; 1st month of the postnatal age; dosage prediction; nephrotoxicity; hypocalcaemia
The injury of thoracolumbar spine and new methods in the diagnosis and treatment The purpose of this study is to find the perfect surgical management of the injury of the thoracic and lumbar spine and especially to recommend the indication for addition of the anterior stabilisation after posterior surgery. MRI investigation of the spine allows to complete current classification systems of thoracic and lumbar injuries based on X- ray and CT scans. MRI investigation allows to divide fractures more exactly to stable and unstable and provides help in the selection of treatment options.Reliability of MRI of posterior ligament complex injury we compare with operative findings and grade of disc injury on MRI we compare with histopathology after disc removing. Fracture; thoracic spine; lumbar spine; surgery; MRI; anterior approach	The injury of thoracolumbar spine and new methods in the diagnosis and treatment The purpose of this study is to find the perfect surgical management of the injury of the thoracic and lumbar spine and especially to recommend the indication for addition of the anterior stabilisation after posterior surgery. MRI investigation of the spine allows to complete current classification systems of thoracic and lumbar injuries based on X- ray and CT scans. MRI investigation allows to divide fractures more exactly to stable and unstable and provides help in the selection of treatment options.Reliability of MRI of posterior ligament complex injury we compare with operative findings and grade of disc injury on MRI we compare with histopathology after disc removing. Fracture; thoracic spine; lumbar spine; surgery; MRI; anterior approach
Autologous transplantation of bone marrow cells in patients with acute myocardial infarction. The effect of the number of transplanted cells on the reduction of infarct size This is a multicenter, randomized study evaluating the safety and efficacy of autologous mononuclear bone marrow cell transplantation in 90 patients with acute myocardial infarction. The myocardial function, perfusion, and metabolism in the infarcted area will be compared in patients implanted with a high (100 millions) or standard (10 millions) dose of cells and in the control group not randomized for cell transplantation. The parameters evaluated will be obtained before and 3 months after the cell transplantation. The main aim of our project is to determine the effect of the number of implanted cells on the magnitude of myocardial regeneration and to assure whether the number of implated cells should be adjusted to the infarct size. acute myocardial infarction; cell transplantation; myocardial regeneration; stem cells	Autologous transplantation of bone marrow cells in patients with acute myocardial infarction. The effect of the number of transplanted cells on the reduction of infarct size This is a multicenter, randomized study evaluating the safety and efficacy of autologous mononuclear bone marrow cell transplantation in 90 patients with acute myocardial infarction. The myocardial function, perfusion, and metabolism in the infarcted area will be compared in patients implanted with a high (100 millions) or standard (10 millions) dose of cells and in the control group not randomized for cell transplantation. The parameters evaluated will be obtained before and 3 months after the cell transplantation. The main aim of our project is to determine the effect of the number of implanted cells on the magnitude of myocardial regeneration and to assure whether the number of implated cells should be adjusted to the infarct size. acute myocardial infarction; cell transplantation; myocardial regeneration; stem cells
Study of hypervirulent complexes of Neisseria meningitidis by methods of molecular biology and possibility of their prevention in the Czech Republic by vaccination Clonal analysis of N. meningitidis by the methods of molecular biology will enable definition of participation of hypervirulent complexes on actual morbidity of invasive meningococcal disease in the Czech Republic. Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) willbe the method preferably used for clonal analysis in this project. The MLST data will be sent to the world-wide central MLST database for confirmation and registration. The definition of participation of hypervirulent complexes on actual morbidity of invasive meningococcal disease in the Czech Republic will enable to precise recommendation of vaccination strategy in the Czech Republic. Submission of Czech MLST data to the world-wide central MLST database will contribute to the knowledge which is necessary for the development of universally efficient meningococcal vaccine. N. meningitidis; molecular biology; clonal analysis; hypervirulent; MLST; MLEE; vaccine; vaccination strategy	Study of hypervirulent complexes of Neisseria meningitidis by methods of molecular biology and possibility of their prevention in the Czech Republic by vaccination Clonal analysis of N. meningitidis by the methods of molecular biology will enable definition of participation of hypervirulent complexes on actual morbidity of invasive meningococcal disease in the Czech Republic. Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) willbe the method preferably used for clonal analysis in this project. The MLST data will be sent to the world-wide central MLST database for confirmation and registration. The definition of participation of hypervirulent complexes on actual morbidity of invasive meningococcal disease in the Czech Republic will enable to precise recommendation of vaccination strategy in the Czech Republic. Submission of Czech MLST data to the world-wide central MLST database will contribute to the knowledge which is necessary for the development of universally efficient meningococcal vaccine. N. meningitidis; molecular biology; clonal analysis; hypervirulent; MLST; MLEE; vaccine; vaccination strategy
The development and application of new biotechnological methods to study relationship of phenotypes, genotypes and response to statin therapy upon lipoprotein metabolism Statins are administered to a wide range of individuals on an empirical basis. Investigation of the phenotype and genotype influences on treatment response will allow a more tailored use of these drugs. The development and application of new biotechnological methods to study relationship of phenotypes, genotypes and response to statin therapy upon lipoprotein metabolism will be used: i) distribution of statins and its metabolites in serum lipoprotein and cell membranes, ii) vitamin E content in serum and cell membranes, iii) lipoperoxidation formation and antioxidant consumption diagnostic methods; statins; lipoperoxidation; dyslipidaemia; HPLC; atherosclerosis; vitamine E; phenotype, genotype	The development and application of new biotechnological methods to study relationship of phenotypes, genotypes and response to statin therapy upon lipoprotein metabolism Statins are administered to a wide range of individuals on an empirical basis. Investigation of the phenotype and genotype influences on treatment response will allow a more tailored use of these drugs. The development and application of new biotechnological methods to study relationship of phenotypes, genotypes and response to statin therapy upon lipoprotein metabolism will be used: i) distribution of statins and its metabolites in serum lipoprotein and cell membranes, ii) vitamin E content in serum and cell membranes, iii) lipoperoxidation formation and antioxidant consumption diagnostic methods; statins; lipoperoxidation; dyslipidaemia; HPLC; atherosclerosis; vitamine E; phenotype, genotype
In-vitro study of molecular-genetic cuase of cell resistance against selected drugs The aim of this study is the search for and validation of more markers of drug resistance (among the known as MDR1, MRP1 or BCRP) and possible genetic predisposing factors. By comparing the gene expression profile of both the parental and resistant cell-line, the specific role of ABC transporters in emerging drug resistance in context of other genes expression will be determined. Cell-lines genetically modified to over-express selected ABC transporter will be used in functional study and the specific substrate transport will be determined. Expected result of this study is finding and verification of genes concerning multidrug resistance which should be used as a markers for drug resistance early diagnosis. molecular; genetics; resistance; drug; cell-line; ABC-transporter; transport	In-vitro study of molecular-genetic cuase of cell resistance against selected drugs The aim of this study is the search for and validation of more markers of drug resistance (among the known as MDR1, MRP1 or BCRP) and possible genetic predisposing factors. By comparing the gene expression profile of both the parental and resistant cell-line, the specific role of ABC transporters in emerging drug resistance in context of other genes expression will be determined. Cell-lines genetically modified to over-express selected ABC transporter will be used in functional study and the specific substrate transport will be determined. Expected result of this study is finding and verification of genes concerning multidrug resistance which should be used as a markers for drug resistance early diagnosis. molecular; genetics; resistance; drug; cell-line; ABC-transporter; transport
The utilization of biocompatible macroporous hydrogels containing cell cultures in the therapy of spinal cord injuries The project relies on the utilization of biocompatible macroporous hydrogels enriched with suitable cell cultures in order to repair structural defects in the central nervous system, mainly post-traumatic pseudocysts resulting from spinal cord injury. The creation of three-dimensional structures containing stem cells could be a solution to the regeneration of spinal cord tissue in chronic patients. spinal cord injury; tissue engineering; olfactory glial cells; bone marrow stromal cells; implantation; biomaterials; macroporous hydrogels	The utilization of biocompatible macroporous hydrogels containing cell cultures in the therapy of spinal cord injuries The project relies on the utilization of biocompatible macroporous hydrogels enriched with suitable cell cultures in order to repair structural defects in the central nervous system, mainly post-traumatic pseudocysts resulting from spinal cord injury. The creation of three-dimensional structures containing stem cells could be a solution to the regeneration of spinal cord tissue in chronic patients. spinal cord injury; tissue engineering; olfactory glial cells; bone marrow stromal cells; implantation; biomaterials; macroporous hydrogels
The significance of some cytokines and markers of oxidative stress measured in exhaled breath condensate for prediction of acute and chronic rejection after lung transplantation The objective of the project is to determine whether the selected markers associated with the accumulation and activation of neutrophils or lymphocytes, pH and markers of oxidative stress measured in exhaled breath condensate can predict rejection. lung transplantation; rejection; breath condensate; markers; chemokines; oxidative stress	The significance of some cytokines and markers of oxidative stress measured in exhaled breath condensate for prediction of acute and chronic rejection after lung transplantation The objective of the project is to determine whether the selected markers associated with the accumulation and activation of neutrophils or lymphocytes, pH and markers of oxidative stress measured in exhaled breath condensate can predict rejection. lung transplantation; rejection; breath condensate; markers; chemokines; oxidative stress
ANALYSIS OF GENETIC AND EPIGENETIC EVENTS RESPONSIBLE FOR DEVELOPMENT OF SEVERE AND LETHAL TOXICITY FOLLOWING FLUOROPYRIMIDINES TREATMENT IN ONCOLOGY PATIENTS The aim of the project is pharmacogenomic analysis of the severe toxicity development following fluoropyrimidines treatment, focused on catabolic enzymes of their metabolism DPD and DPYS. A clinical utilization of the analysis will be evaluated. Using molecular biology approaches we will perform analysis of a) mutation in DPYD/DPYS b) their expression c) DPYD promoter in population of patients treated by fluoropyrimidines w/wo toxicity. Population frequency of mutations will be performed. Mutations willbe studied by DHPLC/sequencing. Novel mutations will be characterized by computer modeling of protein structure. Expression will be quantified by real-time PCR. Promoter sequences will be studied by methylation-specific PCR/sequencing. Statistical analysis of results and their correlation with clinical data allows assessment of: reduction of morbidity and mortality, treatment efficacy in patients w/wo pharmacogenomic analysis and evaluation of inpatient and treatment costs. fluoropyrimidines; toxicity; DPD; mutation; sequencing; qRT-PCR; dihydropyrimidinase; hypermethylation	ANALYSIS OF GENETIC AND EPIGENETIC EVENTS RESPONSIBLE FOR DEVELOPMENT OF SEVERE AND LETHAL TOXICITY FOLLOWING FLUOROPYRIMIDINES TREATMENT IN ONCOLOGY PATIENTS The aim of the project is pharmacogenomic analysis of the severe toxicity development following fluoropyrimidines treatment, focused on catabolic enzymes of their metabolism DPD and DPYS. A clinical utilization of the analysis will be evaluated. Using molecular biology approaches we will perform analysis of a) mutation in DPYD/DPYS b) their expression c) DPYD promoter in population of patients treated by fluoropyrimidines w/wo toxicity. Population frequency of mutations will be performed. Mutations willbe studied by DHPLC/sequencing. Novel mutations will be characterized by computer modeling of protein structure. Expression will be quantified by real-time PCR. Promoter sequences will be studied by methylation-specific PCR/sequencing. Statistical analysis of results and their correlation with clinical data allows assessment of: reduction of morbidity and mortality, treatment efficacy in patients w/wo pharmacogenomic analysis and evaluation of inpatient and treatment costs. fluoropyrimidines; toxicity; DPD; mutation; sequencing; qRT-PCR; dihydropyrimidinase; hypermethylation
In vitro separation and molecular analysis of graft-versus-host-specific and graft-versus-tumor-specific T cells The aim of this project is to identify, separate and characterize individual T cell clones responsible for graft-versus-host and graft-versus-tumor effects. Further aim is to minimize alloreactivity and potentiate anti-cancer reactivity. T cell; transplantation; tumor; alloreactivity	In vitro separation and molecular analysis of graft-versus-host-specific and graft-versus-tumor-specific T cells The aim of this project is to identify, separate and characterize individual T cell clones responsible for graft-versus-host and graft-versus-tumor effects. Further aim is to minimize alloreactivity and potentiate anti-cancer reactivity. T cell; transplantation; tumor; alloreactivity
Pharmacogenomics - a promising way for reasonable and efficacious multiple sclerosis treatment Observation of seleted genes expression in patients with the first attack of neurological symptomatology suspected of multiple sclerosis development before and after the initiation of interferon beta treatment. Efficacy of interferon beta treatment is closely in correlation with expression or inhibition of a group of crucial genes. Correlation between gene expression, clinical effect and MRI changes bring the possibility early to detect non-responsiveness to interferon beta treatment, intesify the therapy and so prevent irreversible damage of the central nervous system. Early nad sufficient multiple sclerosis treatment is the only possible way how to prevent permanent neurological deficit and to preserve patients quality of life. multiple sclerosis; pharmacogenomics; interferon beta; clinically isolated syndrome; DNA; RNA	Pharmacogenomics - a promising way for reasonable and efficacious multiple sclerosis treatment Observation of seleted genes expression in patients with the first attack of neurological symptomatology suspected of multiple sclerosis development before and after the initiation of interferon beta treatment. Efficacy of interferon beta treatment is closely in correlation with expression or inhibition of a group of crucial genes. Correlation between gene expression, clinical effect and MRI changes bring the possibility early to detect non-responsiveness to interferon beta treatment, intesify the therapy and so prevent irreversible damage of the central nervous system. Early nad sufficient multiple sclerosis treatment is the only possible way how to prevent permanent neurological deficit and to preserve patients quality of life. multiple sclerosis; pharmacogenomics; interferon beta; clinically isolated syndrome; DNA; RNA
Research and inovation of the methods of an integrated plant management of the pea (Pisum sativum L.) against the chosen insect pests The essential of the project are actual problems of the protection of the pea (Pisum sativum L.) against some crucial insect pests, whose importance has increased during the several last years or the methods of controlling them are not elaborated. The benefit from the results of the project for agricultural practice should be a formulation of a complex methodological access towards protection of pea (Pisum sativum L.) against Bruchus pisorum L. and other chosen insect pests (Cydia nigricana (F.), Thysanoptera) occurring in and infesting the pea practically at same time. The other part of the project concerns the evaluation of the effect of the insecticidal coating of pea seeds on a decrease of a damaging pea with pea leaf weevils (Sitona spp.) and onanincrease of yield parameters. hmyzí škůdce; ochrana; monitoring; moření; insekticidy; hrách; osivo; třásněnky; listopasi; zrnokaz hrachový; obaleč hrachový	Research and inovation of the methods of an integrated plant management of the pea (Pisum sativum L.) against the chosen insect pests The essential of the project are actual problems of the protection of the pea (Pisum sativum L.) against some crucial insect pests, whose importance has increased during the several last years or the methods of controlling them are not elaborated. The benefit from the results of the project for agricultural practice should be a formulation of a complex methodological access towards protection of pea (Pisum sativum L.) against Bruchus pisorum L. and other chosen insect pests (Cydia nigricana (F.), Thysanoptera) occurring in and infesting the pea practically at same time. The other part of the project concerns the evaluation of the effect of the insecticidal coating of pea seeds on a decrease of a damaging pea with pea leaf weevils (Sitona spp.) and onanincrease of yield parameters. hmyzí škůdce; ochrana; monitoring; moření; insekticidy; hrách; osivo; třásněnky; listopasi; zrnokaz hrachový; obaleč hrachový
Development and testing of the system of analytical methods for practical characterization of potato cultivars registered in the Czech Republic Currently, 116 potato cultivars are registered in the Czech Republic, and classical (morphological) characterization of potato cultivars on tuber level is insufficient. The characterization (identification) of potato cultivars is especially important from the point of view potato trade. Valid legal norm (act 110 / 1997 Sb. and decree 157 / 2003 Sb.) require the guarantee of cultivar declaration for table potatoes in comercial relations. Control authorities (Czech Agriculture and Food Inspection Authority, Central Institute for Supervising and Testing in Agriculture, Czech Trade Inspection) need a convenient tool for genotype identification and verification of cultivar declaration. The aim of this project is development and testing of the system of molecular biological methods (cultivar profiles of proteins, isozymes and DNA markers) for practical characterization of potato cultivars registered in the Czech Republic. The main solution of this project will be consist in the creating of integrated tech brambory; odrůdy; elektroforéza; proteinové a enzymové profily; izolace DNA; RAPD; AFLP; SSR; ITS; databáze	Development and testing of the system of analytical methods for practical characterization of potato cultivars registered in the Czech Republic Currently, 116 potato cultivars are registered in the Czech Republic, and classical (morphological) characterization of potato cultivars on tuber level is insufficient. The characterization (identification) of potato cultivars is especially important from the point of view potato trade. Valid legal norm (act 110 / 1997 Sb. and decree 157 / 2003 Sb.) require the guarantee of cultivar declaration for table potatoes in comercial relations. Control authorities (Czech Agriculture and Food Inspection Authority, Central Institute for Supervising and Testing in Agriculture, Czech Trade Inspection) need a convenient tool for genotype identification and verification of cultivar declaration. The aim of this project is development and testing of the system of molecular biological methods (cultivar profiles of proteins, isozymes and DNA markers) for practical characterization of potato cultivars registered in the Czech Republic. The main solution of this project will be consist in the creating of integrated tech brambory; odrůdy; elektroforéza; proteinové a enzymové profily; izolace DNA; RAPD; AFLP; SSR; ITS; databáze
Regulation of Iodine - content in Animal Products In the Czech Republic, iodine deficit in farm animals and humans is resolved i.a. through an increased supplementation of iodine in mineral mixtures. This results in an increased iodine ratio in animal products. With regard to a possible risk of excessive iodine intake in particular in treated milk, the project aims at an analytical verification of the current iodine content in raw and treated milk, in meat, and in egg yolk. Simultaneously, the supplementation of iodine to dairy cows will be evaluated and adjusted in order to prevent risks of inadequate iodine intake. A supplementary monitoring of the excretion of iodine in urine and faeces in particular in animals that are bred in areas with a higher degree of nature and water protection represents anew aspect of a growing iodine presence in the food chain. Jód; mléko; maso; vejce; skot; výživa člověka	Regulation of Iodine - content in Animal Products In the Czech Republic, iodine deficit in farm animals and humans is resolved i.a. through an increased supplementation of iodine in mineral mixtures. This results in an increased iodine ratio in animal products. With regard to a possible risk of excessive iodine intake in particular in treated milk, the project aims at an analytical verification of the current iodine content in raw and treated milk, in meat, and in egg yolk. Simultaneously, the supplementation of iodine to dairy cows will be evaluated and adjusted in order to prevent risks of inadequate iodine intake. A supplementary monitoring of the excretion of iodine in urine and faeces in particular in animals that are bred in areas with a higher degree of nature and water protection represents anew aspect of a growing iodine presence in the food chain. Jód; mléko; maso; vejce; skot; výživa člověka
Protection of common carp (Cyprinus carpio L.) culture from KHV disease Cases of mass kills of common carp and of ornamental koi carp caused by a highly infectious disease have appeared in various places of the world since 1998. Koi Herpes Virus (KHV) was identified as its etiological agens. The PCR method was used in foreign laboratories to identify the agens. The proposed project is aimed to collect informations on the incidence, diagnostics and KHV prevention in the world and namely in EU countries, further to practical checking the applicability of PCR for KHV diagnostics and, subsequently, to the application of PCR method in field monitoring the contagious situation in common carp and koi carp culture in the Czech Republic. Backgrounds for legislative measures to protect the territory of the Czech Republic from importation of the KHV disease will be made upon all the informations gained in this project. Koi Herpes Virus; kapr; koi kapr; PCR	Protection of common carp (Cyprinus carpio L.) culture from KHV disease Cases of mass kills of common carp and of ornamental koi carp caused by a highly infectious disease have appeared in various places of the world since 1998. Koi Herpes Virus (KHV) was identified as its etiological agens. The PCR method was used in foreign laboratories to identify the agens. The proposed project is aimed to collect informations on the incidence, diagnostics and KHV prevention in the world and namely in EU countries, further to practical checking the applicability of PCR for KHV diagnostics and, subsequently, to the application of PCR method in field monitoring the contagious situation in common carp and koi carp culture in the Czech Republic. Backgrounds for legislative measures to protect the territory of the Czech Republic from importation of the KHV disease will be made upon all the informations gained in this project. Koi Herpes Virus; kapr; koi kapr; PCR
The new prediction methods of bull fertility improving the breeding in cattle New criteria of bull fertility and prediction of in vitro embryo production will be proposed. The correlations between spermatozoa functional status, outcome of fertilization, kinetics of embryo development and embryo chromosomal status will be determined. The possibility to specify the in vivo bull fertility prognosis and to eliminate bulls unsuitabled for breeding will be verified. skot; spermie; struktura chromatinu; funkční vlastnosti; fertilita; prognoza; vitro fertilizace; embrya	The new prediction methods of bull fertility improving the breeding in cattle New criteria of bull fertility and prediction of in vitro embryo production will be proposed. The correlations between spermatozoa functional status, outcome of fertilization, kinetics of embryo development and embryo chromosomal status will be determined. The possibility to specify the in vivo bull fertility prognosis and to eliminate bulls unsuitabled for breeding will be verified. skot; spermie; struktura chromatinu; funkční vlastnosti; fertilita; prognoza; vitro fertilizace; embrya
Resistance of Salmonella to antimicrobial compounds Increase in incidence of multidrug resistant Salmonella spp. has been observed over the past few years. This is one of the reasons why we propose a project which would deal with the presence of such strains in the Czech Republic. After a set up of the collection of the multidrug resistant isolates of Salmonella spp. (incl. the epidemiological information for each strain), specific PCRs for the detection of genes most frequently responsible for drug resistance in Salmonella will be developed. After the verification process, such techniques will be made available for the diagnostic laboratories involved in the project. In the next step we will focus on less frequent resistances in Salmonella especially against trimethoprim and fluoroquinolones using realtime PCR (mutational analysis of gyrA gene) followed by DNA sequencing of gyrA and dhfr genes in selected strains. Final part of the project will deal with possible modes of transmission of the drug resistances among different Salmonella populations usi antibiotika; rezistence; integron; plazmid	Resistance of Salmonella to antimicrobial compounds Increase in incidence of multidrug resistant Salmonella spp. has been observed over the past few years. This is one of the reasons why we propose a project which would deal with the presence of such strains in the Czech Republic. After a set up of the collection of the multidrug resistant isolates of Salmonella spp. (incl. the epidemiological information for each strain), specific PCRs for the detection of genes most frequently responsible for drug resistance in Salmonella will be developed. After the verification process, such techniques will be made available for the diagnostic laboratories involved in the project. In the next step we will focus on less frequent resistances in Salmonella especially against trimethoprim and fluoroquinolones using realtime PCR (mutational analysis of gyrA gene) followed by DNA sequencing of gyrA and dhfr genes in selected strains. Final part of the project will deal with possible modes of transmission of the drug resistances among different Salmonella populations usi antibiotika; rezistence; integron; plazmid
The pathogenesis of enteric colibacillosis and salmonellosis of pigs. The aim of the project is to study the pathogenesis of enteral colibacillosis of piglets after weaning. The virulence factors of E. coli O149:K88(F4) and resistance or sensitivity of piglets to edema disease after weaning will be investigated with respect to genotype of piglets, that are sensitive or resistant to E. coli F18 colonising factors. E. coli and S. typhimurium strains selected within the project will be attenuated and used as different delivery systems for the expresion of heterologous antigens. Escherichia coli; Salmonella typhimurium; enterotoxin; koliinfekce; sele; faktory virulence; exprese cizorodých antigenů	The pathogenesis of enteric colibacillosis and salmonellosis of pigs. The aim of the project is to study the pathogenesis of enteral colibacillosis of piglets after weaning. The virulence factors of E. coli O149:K88(F4) and resistance or sensitivity of piglets to edema disease after weaning will be investigated with respect to genotype of piglets, that are sensitive or resistant to E. coli F18 colonising factors. E. coli and S. typhimurium strains selected within the project will be attenuated and used as different delivery systems for the expresion of heterologous antigens. Escherichia coli; Salmonella typhimurium; enterotoxin; koliinfekce; sele; faktory virulence; exprese cizorodých antigenů
The development of new diagnostic method and their application in eradication of production diseases of viral aetiology (IBR, BVD-MD). The project is oriented to the development and application of new diagnostic procedures in herd eradication programmes against infectious bovine rhinotracheitis (IBR) and bovine viral diarrhoea (BVD-MD). It also includes methodology for eradication, prevention and diagnostics of IBR and BVDV viruses in cattle herds in the Czech Republic. Herd eradication programmes against the above infections will be more effective for cattle breeders than the current procedures. Infekční bovinní rhinotracheitída (IBR); bovinní virová diarrhoea BVD-MD); eradikační program; prevence; diagnostika; ELISA; monoklonální protilátky	The development of new diagnostic method and their application in eradication of production diseases of viral aetiology (IBR, BVD-MD). The project is oriented to the development and application of new diagnostic procedures in herd eradication programmes against infectious bovine rhinotracheitis (IBR) and bovine viral diarrhoea (BVD-MD). It also includes methodology for eradication, prevention and diagnostics of IBR and BVDV viruses in cattle herds in the Czech Republic. Herd eradication programmes against the above infections will be more effective for cattle breeders than the current procedures. Infekční bovinní rhinotracheitída (IBR); bovinní virová diarrhoea BVD-MD); eradikační program; prevence; diagnostika; ELISA; monoklonální protilátky
Detection of carp immunoglobulins and their use in diagnosis of spring viraemia of carp Spring viraemia of carp (SVC) is an acute haemorrhagic disease affecting common carp (Cyprinus carpio) and other cyprinids; it causes considerable losses in carp breeds. Presently, that disease is not liable to statutory notification and therefore the breeders are not obliged to regularly collect samples for causal agent determination. Detection of specific antibodies seems to be perspective for analysis of the spring virus incidence in the Czech Republic in the existing situation. The aim of the proposed project is the preparation of polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies to carp immunoglobulin which will be used as basic components for diagnosis of specific antibodies against the SVC virus in common carp and other cyprinids, possibly also of specificantibodies of a different aetiology. By means of screening based on serological examinations of carp blood sera, it will be possible to monitor the status of incidence of the virus in various localities and if necessary to take adequate prophylactic meas jarní; virémie; kaprů; polyklonální; protilátky; monoklonální; protilátky	Detection of carp immunoglobulins and their use in diagnosis of spring viraemia of carp Spring viraemia of carp (SVC) is an acute haemorrhagic disease affecting common carp (Cyprinus carpio) and other cyprinids; it causes considerable losses in carp breeds. Presently, that disease is not liable to statutory notification and therefore the breeders are not obliged to regularly collect samples for causal agent determination. Detection of specific antibodies seems to be perspective for analysis of the spring virus incidence in the Czech Republic in the existing situation. The aim of the proposed project is the preparation of polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies to carp immunoglobulin which will be used as basic components for diagnosis of specific antibodies against the SVC virus in common carp and other cyprinids, possibly also of specificantibodies of a different aetiology. By means of screening based on serological examinations of carp blood sera, it will be possible to monitor the status of incidence of the virus in various localities and if necessary to take adequate prophylactic meas jarní; virémie; kaprů; polyklonální; protilátky; monoklonální; protilátky
Methods of the efficiency improvement of vaccination procedures in farm animals. The aim of the project is to deepen and revise knowledge of possibilities in vaccination procedures in agricultural practice. Pieces of information obtained in four partial aims: - determination of immunocompetency of calves and piglets, - induction ofresponse to vaccination in offspring with high levels of colostrum-derived antibodies, - characterization of immune response to intradermal application of antigen, - induction of immune response on mucosal surface in respiratory tract will be used inthe agricultural fieldwork for improvement of immunoprophylactic approaches to inhibition of two economically important diseases - actinobacillary pleuropneumonia of swine and infectious bovine rhinotracheitis of cattle. vakcinace; imunitní odpověď; tele; sele; imunokompetence; kolostrální protilátky; intradermální aplikace; slizniční imunita; aktinobacilus; bovinní herpesvirus 1; respirační trakt	Methods of the efficiency improvement of vaccination procedures in farm animals. The aim of the project is to deepen and revise knowledge of possibilities in vaccination procedures in agricultural practice. Pieces of information obtained in four partial aims: - determination of immunocompetency of calves and piglets, - induction ofresponse to vaccination in offspring with high levels of colostrum-derived antibodies, - characterization of immune response to intradermal application of antigen, - induction of immune response on mucosal surface in respiratory tract will be used inthe agricultural fieldwork for improvement of immunoprophylactic approaches to inhibition of two economically important diseases - actinobacillary pleuropneumonia of swine and infectious bovine rhinotracheitis of cattle. vakcinace; imunitní odpověď; tele; sele; imunokompetence; kolostrální protilátky; intradermální aplikace; slizniční imunita; aktinobacilus; bovinní herpesvirus 1; respirační trakt
The effective cryopreservation of in vitro bovine embryos applied in cattle reproduction and breeding improvement. The main objective of the project is to improve development and freezibility of in vitro produced bovine embryos by fertilization of oocytes with the greater developmental competence and modification of maturation conditions.The final aim of the projectis to increase the efficiency of production and cryopreservation of embryos in cattle reproduction and breeding. skot; IVP embrya; krykonzervace; reprodukce; šlechtění	The effective cryopreservation of in vitro bovine embryos applied in cattle reproduction and breeding improvement. The main objective of the project is to improve development and freezibility of in vitro produced bovine embryos by fertilization of oocytes with the greater developmental competence and modification of maturation conditions.The final aim of the projectis to increase the efficiency of production and cryopreservation of embryos in cattle reproduction and breeding. skot; IVP embrya; krykonzervace; reprodukce; šlechtění
Relationship of heifers rearing, longevity, health and reproduction ability of dairy cows. In recent years has recorded high number problematically conceptioned dairy heifers and dairy cows with reproduction, production and metabolic disorders. This phenomenon influences all effectivity of dairy breeds breeding in the Czech Republic. Good reproduction ability is important presumption for prosperity of cattle breeding. Presented project is directed to evaluation of relationship of growth indicators during rearing of dairy heifers to development of their reproductive system, also to following dairy performance at first lactation, on evalution selected parameters (diameter, linear type traits, breeding value) on health, reproduction ability, longevity of dairy cattle in CR. Next on evalution of count of occurence of reproduction, production andmetabolic disoreders of dairy cows on next lactation too. Aim will be reduction of the disorders in heifers and cows of dairy breeds, lower culling of the animals, elevation of exploitation productive potential and reduction of costs to rearing of heife jalovice; dojnice; reprodukce; odchov; brakace; mléčná užitkovost; produkce; metabolické poruchy; dlouhověkost	Relationship of heifers rearing, longevity, health and reproduction ability of dairy cows. In recent years has recorded high number problematically conceptioned dairy heifers and dairy cows with reproduction, production and metabolic disorders. This phenomenon influences all effectivity of dairy breeds breeding in the Czech Republic. Good reproduction ability is important presumption for prosperity of cattle breeding. Presented project is directed to evaluation of relationship of growth indicators during rearing of dairy heifers to development of their reproductive system, also to following dairy performance at first lactation, on evalution selected parameters (diameter, linear type traits, breeding value) on health, reproduction ability, longevity of dairy cattle in CR. Next on evalution of count of occurence of reproduction, production andmetabolic disoreders of dairy cows on next lactation too. Aim will be reduction of the disorders in heifers and cows of dairy breeds, lower culling of the animals, elevation of exploitation productive potential and reduction of costs to rearing of heife jalovice; dojnice; reprodukce; odchov; brakace; mléčná užitkovost; produkce; metabolické poruchy; dlouhověkost
The increasing of the milk consumption by the study of impacts of the changed technologies in the milk production and impacts of health parameters of dairy cow herds on the nutritional quality and biological value of cow milk as foodstuff raw material The project is proposed and aimed for obtaining the arguments for milk consumption in its basis. The agriculture production has been very significant changed in terms of technology structure during last fifteen years in the Czech Republic. The milk production has been changed in the similar way: dairy cow rearing; breed composition of the dairy cattle population; milking equipment; dairy cow freeding; milk yield; hygienical safety; raw milk quality. These changes have been mostly positive. Mentioned changes have caused certain impacts in terms of milk composition and properties - it means changes of molecule composition of its main nutritional components and its biological value. This compoments were studied in sixtieth and eightieth years at last timebut not after mentioned technological changes in last years. The hygienical quality of raw milk has been increased very significantly during these technological changes. Nevertheless, the public consumers have been informed negatively about useability o Mléko; kráva; plemeno; technologie chovu; úroveň výživy; zdravotní stav stáda krav; produkční porucha; vzorek mléka; složení mléka; dusíkaté látky mléka; vlastnosti mléka; zdravotní ukazatele mléka; mikroprvky; makroprvky; bílkoviny; aminokyseliny; tuk	The increasing of the milk consumption by the study of impacts of the changed technologies in the milk production and impacts of health parameters of dairy cow herds on the nutritional quality and biological value of cow milk as foodstuff raw material The project is proposed and aimed for obtaining the arguments for milk consumption in its basis. The agriculture production has been very significant changed in terms of technology structure during last fifteen years in the Czech Republic. The milk production has been changed in the similar way: dairy cow rearing; breed composition of the dairy cattle population; milking equipment; dairy cow freeding; milk yield; hygienical safety; raw milk quality. These changes have been mostly positive. Mentioned changes have caused certain impacts in terms of milk composition and properties - it means changes of molecule composition of its main nutritional components and its biological value. This compoments were studied in sixtieth and eightieth years at last timebut not after mentioned technological changes in last years. The hygienical quality of raw milk has been increased very significantly during these technological changes. Nevertheless, the public consumers have been informed negatively about useability o Mléko; kráva; plemeno; technologie chovu; úroveň výživy; zdravotní stav stáda krav; produkční porucha; vzorek mléka; složení mléka; dusíkaté látky mléka; vlastnosti mléka; zdravotní ukazatele mléka; mikroprvky; makroprvky; bílkoviny; aminokyseliny; tuk
The Conroll of Process of Milk and Chees Quality by the Essencial Amino Acids Supplementation. In this projekt will be solved influence of protected of essencial amino acids and of protein on quality of milk and cheese. Amino acids and protein will be applied into the animals as the tablets. The function of these tablets is to transport the aminoacids and protein through the rumen and to protect them against the rumen microbes. The tablets will be dissolved in abomasum and amino acids will be utilized in intestine of the dairy cows. Our new type of tablets has 5-10 mm size. In the first year ofproject will be in a pysiological trial applied tablets with a protein, methionine and lysine into the 4 dairy cows, tablets will be put on the bottom of rumen through the cannula. The influence on milk quality and number of rejected tablets will be recognized. In next 4 years will be done trials with 12 intact dairy cows, the influence on quality of milk and cheese will be evaluated. As the factors will be used the protein with methionine and lysine, lack of leucine, histidine and threonine. In all tri chráněné aminokyseliny; protein; mléko; kvalita potravin; sýr; systém PDI; dojnice; intestinum; stravitelnost; organická hmota	The Conroll of Process of Milk and Chees Quality by the Essencial Amino Acids Supplementation. In this projekt will be solved influence of protected of essencial amino acids and of protein on quality of milk and cheese. Amino acids and protein will be applied into the animals as the tablets. The function of these tablets is to transport the aminoacids and protein through the rumen and to protect them against the rumen microbes. The tablets will be dissolved in abomasum and amino acids will be utilized in intestine of the dairy cows. Our new type of tablets has 5-10 mm size. In the first year ofproject will be in a pysiological trial applied tablets with a protein, methionine and lysine into the 4 dairy cows, tablets will be put on the bottom of rumen through the cannula. The influence on milk quality and number of rejected tablets will be recognized. In next 4 years will be done trials with 12 intact dairy cows, the influence on quality of milk and cheese will be evaluated. As the factors will be used the protein with methionine and lysine, lack of leucine, histidine and threonine. In all tri chráněné aminokyseliny; protein; mléko; kvalita potravin; sýr; systém PDI; dojnice; intestinum; stravitelnost; organická hmota
Modelling and experimental research of thermoinactivation, baroinactivation and growth of selected micro-organisms The aim of the project proposed is the experimental reseach and mathematical models of the thermo and baroinactivation of selected microorganisms, surviving the mild pasteurisation of milk and human milk namely Enterococcus faecium. Further, the aim ofthe project is the experimental research and mathematical model of the growth of this microorganism as a function of water activity, pH and temperature. The second part of the project is devoted to the experiments and mathematical models of baroinactivation of selected microorganisms typical for fruit and vegetable and meat product contamination. thermoinaktivace; baroinaktivace; Enterococcus faecium; vybrané mikroorganismy; aktivita vody; pH; teplota; čas; tlak	Modelling and experimental research of thermoinactivation, baroinactivation and growth of selected micro-organisms The aim of the project proposed is the experimental reseach and mathematical models of the thermo and baroinactivation of selected microorganisms, surviving the mild pasteurisation of milk and human milk namely Enterococcus faecium. Further, the aim ofthe project is the experimental research and mathematical model of the growth of this microorganism as a function of water activity, pH and temperature. The second part of the project is devoted to the experiments and mathematical models of baroinactivation of selected microorganisms typical for fruit and vegetable and meat product contamination. thermoinaktivace; baroinaktivace; Enterococcus faecium; vybrané mikroorganismy; aktivita vody; pH; teplota; čas; tlak
Research and development of standard methods of recovering cultivars of fruit trees and grapevine from viruses, phytoplasmas and quarantine pathogens by thermotherapy and in vitro culture for certification system of healthy state of planted material. Virus free prabasic plants of commercial cultivars will be obtained after the determination of pathogens in fruit tree and grapevine plants of maintenance breeding by means of their recovering by thermotherapy and in vitro cultures. The standard methodsof recovering of primary sources of apple, pear, sweet cherry, apricot, peach and grapevine will be developed for system of certification in the Czech Republic. Conditions for the elimination of Plum pox virus from plants of plum, apricot and peach cultivars will be determined. ovocné stromy; réva vinná; ozdravení; viry; viroidy; fytoplazmy; karanténní patogeny; termoterapie; in vitro kultury	Research and development of standard methods of recovering cultivars of fruit trees and grapevine from viruses, phytoplasmas and quarantine pathogens by thermotherapy and in vitro culture for certification system of healthy state of planted material. Virus free prabasic plants of commercial cultivars will be obtained after the determination of pathogens in fruit tree and grapevine plants of maintenance breeding by means of their recovering by thermotherapy and in vitro cultures. The standard methodsof recovering of primary sources of apple, pear, sweet cherry, apricot, peach and grapevine will be developed for system of certification in the Czech Republic. Conditions for the elimination of Plum pox virus from plants of plum, apricot and peach cultivars will be determined. ovocné stromy; réva vinná; ozdravení; viry; viroidy; fytoplazmy; karanténní patogeny; termoterapie; in vitro kultury
Application of modern methods of antioxidant activity determination to assessement of hop quality and sensorial stability of beer. Application of modern methods of antioxidant activity determination for hops quality and sensorial beer stability assessement is the topic of the project. Contents of free radicals in solid matrices will be evaluated with respect to the quality and ageofhops. Appropriate analytical methods will be elaborated and verified. The methods will be used for evaluation of antioxidant activity of Czech hop varieties immediately after picking and in the course of long-term storage as well. The influence of hopping to sensorial stability of beers will be investigated too. The influence mentioned above will be investigated from the point of view of varietal structure, way of hop processing (pellets, extracts) and age of hops. The results of model brewing testswill be verified in full scale in several prestigious Czech breweries. antioxidační; aktivita; volné; radikály; chmel; pivo; chmelovar; ESR-elektronová; spinová; rezonance; senzorická; stabilita; chmelové; polyfenoly; stárnutí; chmele; kapalinová; chromatografie	Application of modern methods of antioxidant activity determination to assessement of hop quality and sensorial stability of beer. Application of modern methods of antioxidant activity determination for hops quality and sensorial beer stability assessement is the topic of the project. Contents of free radicals in solid matrices will be evaluated with respect to the quality and ageofhops. Appropriate analytical methods will be elaborated and verified. The methods will be used for evaluation of antioxidant activity of Czech hop varieties immediately after picking and in the course of long-term storage as well. The influence of hopping to sensorial stability of beers will be investigated too. The influence mentioned above will be investigated from the point of view of varietal structure, way of hop processing (pellets, extracts) and age of hops. The results of model brewing testswill be verified in full scale in several prestigious Czech breweries. antioxidační; aktivita; volné; radikály; chmel; pivo; chmelovar; ESR-elektronová; spinová; rezonance; senzorická; stabilita; chmelové; polyfenoly; stárnutí; chmele; kapalinová; chromatografie
Innovation of hop protection against the most important pests as a condition for higher quality and healthy safety of Czech hops The aim of this project is to compare the contemporary methods and a proposal of a new innovated highly efficient strategy of hop protection against the most important pests, damson-hop aphid (Phorodon humul Schrank) and two-spotted spider mite (Tetranychus urticae Koch) from the biological efficiency, integrated hop management, economic effectivenes and negative influence on environement including determination of residues of key aphicides and acaricides in hops and beer point of view. Values LD 50, LD90, C 100 M and resistance indexes of P. humuli and T. urticae to the present registered and perspective zoocides will be determined in laboratory conditions. They will serve as a necessary condition for field comparative trials with different strategiesof hop protection against these very dangerous pests. The most perspective strategies will be suggested at the end of this project. Besides non-target effect of zoocides used within these strategies on chosen species of natural enemies will be determin Chmel; Humulus lupulus L. Rezistence Strategie ochrany chmele Mšice chmelová (Phorodon humuli Schrank) Sviluška chmelová (Tetranychus urticae Koch) Přirození nepřátelé mšice a svilušky chmelové Negativní účinek zoocidů na přirozené nepřátele Ekono	Innovation of hop protection against the most important pests as a condition for higher quality and healthy safety of Czech hops The aim of this project is to compare the contemporary methods and a proposal of a new innovated highly efficient strategy of hop protection against the most important pests, damson-hop aphid (Phorodon humul Schrank) and two-spotted spider mite (Tetranychus urticae Koch) from the biological efficiency, integrated hop management, economic effectivenes and negative influence on environement including determination of residues of key aphicides and acaricides in hops and beer point of view. Values LD 50, LD90, C 100 M and resistance indexes of P. humuli and T. urticae to the present registered and perspective zoocides will be determined in laboratory conditions. They will serve as a necessary condition for field comparative trials with different strategiesof hop protection against these very dangerous pests. The most perspective strategies will be suggested at the end of this project. Besides non-target effect of zoocides used within these strategies on chosen species of natural enemies will be determin Chmel; Humulus lupulus L. Rezistence Strategie ochrany chmele Mšice chmelová (Phorodon humuli Schrank) Sviluška chmelová (Tetranychus urticae Koch) Přirození nepřátelé mšice a svilušky chmelové Negativní účinek zoocidů na přirozené nepřátele Ekono
Development and validation of methods for increasing food quality and food safety using molecular biology technologies in agreement with EU regulations. The project is focused on improvement of food quality and safety according EU regulations.For this purpose modern molecular biology protocols would be applied for detection of chosen pathogenic microorganisms (Salmonella, Listeria, Campylobacter, Fusarium)and presence of transgenic crops. PCR; real-on time PCR; DNA čipy; Salmonella; Listeria; Campylobacter; Fusarium; geneticky modifikované organismy	Development and validation of methods for increasing food quality and food safety using molecular biology technologies in agreement with EU regulations. The project is focused on improvement of food quality and safety according EU regulations.For this purpose modern molecular biology protocols would be applied for detection of chosen pathogenic microorganisms (Salmonella, Listeria, Campylobacter, Fusarium)and presence of transgenic crops. PCR; real-on time PCR; DNA čipy; Salmonella; Listeria; Campylobacter; Fusarium; geneticky modifikované organismy
Safety evalution of foods for gluten-free diet The sensitive method for gliadin and corresponding prolamins of barley and rye determination in gluten-free foodstuffs will be developed.The aim of project will be solved in agreement with experts demands in that field . The pretreatment of the sampleswith complex matrix before ELISA determination will be worked out. The optimized PCR method for wheat detection in gluten-free foodstuffs will be developed. Daily intake of gliadin will be followed in the group of celiac patients. The separated gliadinswill be identified with regard to the toxic peptides content and their biological activity will be studied. ELISA kit interlaboratory testing will be carried out and data for international standardisation will be prepared. celiakie; citlivá metoda; bezlepkové potraviny; bezlepková dieta; imunochemické metody; ELISA; PCR; pšenice; izolace DNA; obsah gliadinu; stanovení gliadinu; proteomická identifikace; prolaminy ječmene a žita	Safety evalution of foods for gluten-free diet The sensitive method for gliadin and corresponding prolamins of barley and rye determination in gluten-free foodstuffs will be developed.The aim of project will be solved in agreement with experts demands in that field . The pretreatment of the sampleswith complex matrix before ELISA determination will be worked out. The optimized PCR method for wheat detection in gluten-free foodstuffs will be developed. Daily intake of gliadin will be followed in the group of celiac patients. The separated gliadinswill be identified with regard to the toxic peptides content and their biological activity will be studied. ELISA kit interlaboratory testing will be carried out and data for international standardisation will be prepared. celiakie; citlivá metoda; bezlepkové potraviny; bezlepková dieta; imunochemické metody; ELISA; PCR; pšenice; izolace DNA; obsah gliadinu; stanovení gliadinu; proteomická identifikace; prolaminy ječmene a žita
Qualitative and quantitative diagnostics of particles of plant and animal origin in foodstuffs using histochemical or immunohistochemical methods. The aim of this study is to develop and verify qualitative and quantitative procedures based on the use of the histochemical and immunohistochemical methods for the identification of foodstuffs particles; to investigate its reliability and usefulness inpractice. potraviny; masné výrobky; škroby; rostlinné bílkoviny; vláknina; kůžové emulze; ELISA; imunohistochemie	Qualitative and quantitative diagnostics of particles of plant and animal origin in foodstuffs using histochemical or immunohistochemical methods. The aim of this study is to develop and verify qualitative and quantitative procedures based on the use of the histochemical and immunohistochemical methods for the identification of foodstuffs particles; to investigate its reliability and usefulness inpractice. potraviny; masné výrobky; škroby; rostlinné bílkoviny; vláknina; kůžové emulze; ELISA; imunohistochemie
Avian tuberculosis and mycobacterioses: the development of methods for theirs prevention and eradication by study of mycobacterial sources and pathogenesis of infection The purpose of the study is an appraisal of occurrence of selected members of Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC): M. avium subsp. avium and M. a. hominisuis in animals and environment in the Czech Republic, based on the analysis of tuberculous lesions inslaughtered animals (mainly cattle and pigs). Detailed identification of isolates by molecular biological methods will be used for monitoring of spreading of mycobacteria in the infected herd, possibly between respective species on one farm. Infection risk of single components of feed and stable environment (litter, drinking water, dust, wild-living birds, small terrestrial mammals etc.) will be assessed by intensive investigations on selected farms with infected animals. During experimental infection ofpigs with M. a. avium, M. a. hominisuis and two atypical mycobacteria (M. terrae, M. fortuitum), immunological profile of infected pigs will be studied by laboratory tests of cell-mediated immunity: blastic transformation test and detection of gamma-in tuberkulóza prasat; atypické mykobaktérie; sérologická diagnostika; buněčná imunita; histologie; masné produkty; hygiena potravin; přežívání mykobaktérií	Avian tuberculosis and mycobacterioses: the development of methods for theirs prevention and eradication by study of mycobacterial sources and pathogenesis of infection The purpose of the study is an appraisal of occurrence of selected members of Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC): M. avium subsp. avium and M. a. hominisuis in animals and environment in the Czech Republic, based on the analysis of tuberculous lesions inslaughtered animals (mainly cattle and pigs). Detailed identification of isolates by molecular biological methods will be used for monitoring of spreading of mycobacteria in the infected herd, possibly between respective species on one farm. Infection risk of single components of feed and stable environment (litter, drinking water, dust, wild-living birds, small terrestrial mammals etc.) will be assessed by intensive investigations on selected farms with infected animals. During experimental infection ofpigs with M. a. avium, M. a. hominisuis and two atypical mycobacteria (M. terrae, M. fortuitum), immunological profile of infected pigs will be studied by laboratory tests of cell-mediated immunity: blastic transformation test and detection of gamma-in tuberkulóza prasat; atypické mykobaktérie; sérologická diagnostika; buněčná imunita; histologie; masné produkty; hygiena potravin; přežívání mykobaktérií
Research and innovation of new molecular diagnostic methods for the study circoviruses, parvovirus, and PRRSV in polymicrobial etiology of infectious diseases in pigs, and for efficiency control of preventive and therapeutical measures. The objective of the project is the development and innovation of quantitative methods of molecular identification of circoviruses, parvoviruses, and PRRSV to determine the importance of viral etiology in polymicrobial infections in pigs which are manifested in herds in the form of syndromes (PWMS/PDNS, PRRS, etc.). Prasečí cirkovirus typu 2 (PCV-2); prasečí parvovirus (PPV); Virus reprodukčního a respiračního syndromu prasat (PRRSV); diagnostika-viry; kvantitativní PCR; rekombinantní proteiny	Research and innovation of new molecular diagnostic methods for the study circoviruses, parvovirus, and PRRSV in polymicrobial etiology of infectious diseases in pigs, and for efficiency control of preventive and therapeutical measures. The objective of the project is the development and innovation of quantitative methods of molecular identification of circoviruses, parvoviruses, and PRRSV to determine the importance of viral etiology in polymicrobial infections in pigs which are manifested in herds in the form of syndromes (PWMS/PDNS, PRRS, etc.). Prasečí cirkovirus typu 2 (PCV-2); prasečí parvovirus (PPV); Virus reprodukčního a respiračního syndromu prasat (PRRSV); diagnostika-viry; kvantitativní PCR; rekombinantní proteiny
Microorganisms from the animal environment in the system of food safety and of antimicrobial resistance monitoring Bacteria penetrating to the men from raw materials and foodstuffs of animal origin and further from the environment of the animals may be direct causes of their diseases and/or may also be the carriers of the determinants of resistance to antimicrobial agents. The purpose of the project is to determine whether selection and conservation of populations of resistant bacteria - Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus faecium and/or Enterococcus faecalis, furtherKlebsiella pneumoniae, Salmonella spp. and Campylobacter jejuni - occur in the environment of animals. Finally, whether selected resistant microbes penetrate to the men by means of the food chain, whilst the livestock specialists are the most exposed and threatened group of people who work in the basic industry producing raw materials of animal origin. Purposive, systematic and complex analysis of farms with dairy cattle herds, including the employees, final products of the dairies supplied with mil Bezpečné potraviny; alimentární infekce; antimikrobiální látky; získaná rezistence; epidemiologie onemocnění	Microorganisms from the animal environment in the system of food safety and of antimicrobial resistance monitoring Bacteria penetrating to the men from raw materials and foodstuffs of animal origin and further from the environment of the animals may be direct causes of their diseases and/or may also be the carriers of the determinants of resistance to antimicrobial agents. The purpose of the project is to determine whether selection and conservation of populations of resistant bacteria - Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus faecium and/or Enterococcus faecalis, furtherKlebsiella pneumoniae, Salmonella spp. and Campylobacter jejuni - occur in the environment of animals. Finally, whether selected resistant microbes penetrate to the men by means of the food chain, whilst the livestock specialists are the most exposed and threatened group of people who work in the basic industry producing raw materials of animal origin. Purposive, systematic and complex analysis of farms with dairy cattle herds, including the employees, final products of the dairies supplied with mil Bezpečné potraviny; alimentární infekce; antimikrobiální látky; získaná rezistence; epidemiologie onemocnění
Development of antibodies and screening tests for the determination of residues of nitrofuran antibiotics in foods Nitrofuran antibiotics are veterinary drugs whose use in animal production is banned in the Czech Republic and EU due to health risks. Recent findings that nitrofurans are still used in some European countries and around the world has caused a crisis inthe field. Analytical methods for nitrofuran drug (furazolidone, nitrofurantoin, furaltadone a nitrofurazone) control are based on the detection of tissue-bound metabolites (3-amino-2-oxazolidinone (AOZ),1-amino-hydantoin (AHD), 3-amino-5-methylmorpholino-2-oxazolidinone (AMOZ) a semikarbazide (SEM). Up to now the establisment of screening ELISA tests for bound metabolites AOZ and AMOZ has enabled the detection of these analytes using two single systems (kits).The aim of this project is ELISA developmentallowing simultaneous detection of two or more nitrofuran metabolites within (one) single test (so called generic test) to simplify and accelerate the screening analysis. To achieve this aim, the suggested development of generic antibodies has been ba nitrofurany; semikarbazid; residua; imunoanalýza; ELISA; generické protilátky; ochrana spotřebitele	Development of antibodies and screening tests for the determination of residues of nitrofuran antibiotics in foods Nitrofuran antibiotics are veterinary drugs whose use in animal production is banned in the Czech Republic and EU due to health risks. Recent findings that nitrofurans are still used in some European countries and around the world has caused a crisis inthe field. Analytical methods for nitrofuran drug (furazolidone, nitrofurantoin, furaltadone a nitrofurazone) control are based on the detection of tissue-bound metabolites (3-amino-2-oxazolidinone (AOZ),1-amino-hydantoin (AHD), 3-amino-5-methylmorpholino-2-oxazolidinone (AMOZ) a semikarbazide (SEM). Up to now the establisment of screening ELISA tests for bound metabolites AOZ and AMOZ has enabled the detection of these analytes using two single systems (kits).The aim of this project is ELISA developmentallowing simultaneous detection of two or more nitrofuran metabolites within (one) single test (so called generic test) to simplify and accelerate the screening analysis. To achieve this aim, the suggested development of generic antibodies has been ba nitrofurany; semikarbazid; residua; imunoanalýza; ELISA; generické protilátky; ochrana spotřebitele
Breeding of new virus-free potato cultivars. In the breeding of new potato cultivars the most decisive factors to obtain and maintain of virus-free materials will be evaluated. E.g. the degree of resistance to Potato virus S (PVS), and also to some other devastating virus strains as PVY-N; the regular objective checking of viruses by means of laboratory diagnosis in the greenhouse as well as in the field will be utilised; most effective methods of early generations transfer of new breeding lines into in vitro conditions, and/or active recover to health in the same conditions will be used. The perspective breeding lines returning to shortened system of virus-free maintenance will be aimed at obtaining of healthy tubers as early as for registration trials. For the more precise characterisationof these perspective materials the methods of molecular analysis will be applied as the basis for unambiguous identification of perspective lines. bezvirový; laboratorní; diagnóza; novošlechtění; terapie; udržování; vnímavost; výskyt; virů	Breeding of new virus-free potato cultivars. In the breeding of new potato cultivars the most decisive factors to obtain and maintain of virus-free materials will be evaluated. E.g. the degree of resistance to Potato virus S (PVS), and also to some other devastating virus strains as PVY-N; the regular objective checking of viruses by means of laboratory diagnosis in the greenhouse as well as in the field will be utilised; most effective methods of early generations transfer of new breeding lines into in vitro conditions, and/or active recover to health in the same conditions will be used. The perspective breeding lines returning to shortened system of virus-free maintenance will be aimed at obtaining of healthy tubers as early as for registration trials. For the more precise characterisationof these perspective materials the methods of molecular analysis will be applied as the basis for unambiguous identification of perspective lines. bezvirový; laboratorní; diagnóza; novošlechtění; terapie; udržování; vnímavost; výskyt; virů
The detection of stored-arthropods contaminants in food commodities by immunochemical methods. The goal of the project is to develop immunochemical techniques for the detection of stored-product pests in food commodities and prove their utilisation in infested food. In comparison to classical methods, immunochemical techniques allow to detect notonly stored-product pests but also their fragments and excrements. As the project outputs, specific polyclonal antibodies will be developed and immunochemical techniques will be optimised for two-level detections of: (1) an unspecific insect contamination; (2) an unspecific stored-product mites contamination; (3) selected allergens that are produced by economically and medically important stored-product mite species (Tyrophagus putrecentiae, Lepidoglyphus destructor, Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, Blattella germanica a Supella longipalpa). Detection methods will be serviceable for the supervision of the State Phytosanitary Administration and the Czech Agriculture and Food Inspection. protilátky; detekce; skladištní škůdci; obilí; potraviny; bezpečnost potravin; alergeny; alergie	The detection of stored-arthropods contaminants in food commodities by immunochemical methods. The goal of the project is to develop immunochemical techniques for the detection of stored-product pests in food commodities and prove their utilisation in infested food. In comparison to classical methods, immunochemical techniques allow to detect notonly stored-product pests but also their fragments and excrements. As the project outputs, specific polyclonal antibodies will be developed and immunochemical techniques will be optimised for two-level detections of: (1) an unspecific insect contamination; (2) an unspecific stored-product mites contamination; (3) selected allergens that are produced by economically and medically important stored-product mite species (Tyrophagus putrecentiae, Lepidoglyphus destructor, Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, Blattella germanica a Supella longipalpa). Detection methods will be serviceable for the supervision of the State Phytosanitary Administration and the Czech Agriculture and Food Inspection. protilátky; detekce; skladištní škůdci; obilí; potraviny; bezpečnost potravin; alergeny; alergie
The production of quality and safe cereal products using different control strategies of maize and store products. The aim of the project is to obtain new knowledge for the reduction of mycotoxins occurrence in feed and food products from maize by the innovation of control strategies during maize growing and storage and to evaluate their influence on health of livestock. The partial aim is to standardize the analytical methods of detection of mycotoxins in cereals. Four different control strategies of maize will be tested to ascertain their influence on the reduction of injury of maize caused by European corn borer,on the occurrence of toxigenic mikromycets and the content of mycotoxins in corn and silage. The relation between the occurrence of micromycets and mycotoxins in maize and their occurrence in wheat and barley (and their products) grown after maize willbeevaluated. The occurrence of toxigenic mikromycets in wheat and barley grown after maize will be controlled by fungicides and biopreparations. Resistant and susceptible varieties of wheat and barley will be grown. In sweet maize only two control strat ochrana rostlin; mykotoxiny; mikromycety; kukuřice; ozimá pšenice; jarní ječmen; zavíječ kukuřičný; siláž; geneticky modifikovaná kukuřice; insekticidy; Trichogramma; skot; nutriční hodnota; zdraví; bachorové procesy; mléčná užitkovost; složení mléka; te	The production of quality and safe cereal products using different control strategies of maize and store products. The aim of the project is to obtain new knowledge for the reduction of mycotoxins occurrence in feed and food products from maize by the innovation of control strategies during maize growing and storage and to evaluate their influence on health of livestock. The partial aim is to standardize the analytical methods of detection of mycotoxins in cereals. Four different control strategies of maize will be tested to ascertain their influence on the reduction of injury of maize caused by European corn borer,on the occurrence of toxigenic mikromycets and the content of mycotoxins in corn and silage. The relation between the occurrence of micromycets and mycotoxins in maize and their occurrence in wheat and barley (and their products) grown after maize willbeevaluated. The occurrence of toxigenic mikromycets in wheat and barley grown after maize will be controlled by fungicides and biopreparations. Resistant and susceptible varieties of wheat and barley will be grown. In sweet maize only two control strat ochrana rostlin; mykotoxiny; mikromycety; kukuřice; ozimá pšenice; jarní ječmen; zavíječ kukuřičný; siláž; geneticky modifikovaná kukuřice; insekticidy; Trichogramma; skot; nutriční hodnota; zdraví; bachorové procesy; mléčná užitkovost; složení mléka; te
Development of effective methods of weed control with minimal negative effect to diversity of weeds societies a negative risk of contamination of soil an plant production by residues of herbicides The aim of this project is development of the methods of control of the weeds in different agriculture systems, description of biology of selected important and poisonous weeds on arable land. Definition of influence of cropping systems to reproduction of weeds and contain of diasporas in soil. The focuses of this project are effective methods of control of weeds with minimal risk of contamination soil and plant production by residues of herbicides. regulace plevelů; biologie plevelů; jedovaté plevele; rezidua herbicidů	Development of effective methods of weed control with minimal negative effect to diversity of weeds societies a negative risk of contamination of soil an plant production by residues of herbicides The aim of this project is development of the methods of control of the weeds in different agriculture systems, description of biology of selected important and poisonous weeds on arable land. Definition of influence of cropping systems to reproduction of weeds and contain of diasporas in soil. The focuses of this project are effective methods of control of weeds with minimal risk of contamination soil and plant production by residues of herbicides. regulace plevelů; biologie plevelů; jedovaté plevele; rezidua herbicidů
Study of selected factors influencing adventitious presence of unwantedand GMO and biodiversity in the context of coexistence of geneticaly modified, conventional and ecological crops. The aim of the project is to look into technical posibilities of spatial isolation of geneticaly modified crops in the selected areas of the Czech Republic. Acquired data can be used when the Good Agriculture Practice dealing with the release and monitoring of geneticaly modified crops is being put in practice. Outputs of the poject will help to fulfill the legislative precautions and recommendations of the EU. Obtained input information on biodiversity of couch-grass in the monitored areas will contribute to optimisation of agricultural systems and will reduce risks to environment.The project will be also oriented on monitoring changes in farming practices on set of farms once GM crops are commercialised. GMO; rizika; pěstební systémy; biodiversita; Elytrigia repens; monitoring	Study of selected factors influencing adventitious presence of unwantedand GMO and biodiversity in the context of coexistence of geneticaly modified, conventional and ecological crops. The aim of the project is to look into technical posibilities of spatial isolation of geneticaly modified crops in the selected areas of the Czech Republic. Acquired data can be used when the Good Agriculture Practice dealing with the release and monitoring of geneticaly modified crops is being put in practice. Outputs of the poject will help to fulfill the legislative precautions and recommendations of the EU. Obtained input information on biodiversity of couch-grass in the monitored areas will contribute to optimisation of agricultural systems and will reduce risks to environment.The project will be also oriented on monitoring changes in farming practices on set of farms once GM crops are commercialised. GMO; rizika; pěstební systémy; biodiversita; Elytrigia repens; monitoring
The interaction of Plum pox, Prune dwarf and Apple chlorotic leafspot viruses with transgenic plants of Prunus domestica L., cv. Stanley, clone C-5 growed in experimental orchard. Transgenic plants of Prunus domestica L.cv. Stanley, clone C-5 inoculated with Plum pox virus (strain PPV-M), Prune dwarf virus, and Apple chlorotic leafspot virus will be evaluated for the presence of symptoms in leaves and fruits. The presence of idividual viruses in leaves of trees will be determined by ELISA and ISEM. The presence of PPV-M in trees resistant to PPV will be verified by RT-PCR. The resistance of transgenic plants to virus infection will be ascertained by determination of relative concentration of protein of individual viruses in leaves of plants, too. Transgenní švestka; stanovení rezistence; virus šarky švestky; virus zakrslosti slivoně; virus chlorotické skvrnitosti jabloně; ELISA; ISEM; RT-PCR; příznaky na plodech a listech	The interaction of Plum pox, Prune dwarf and Apple chlorotic leafspot viruses with transgenic plants of Prunus domestica L., cv. Stanley, clone C-5 growed in experimental orchard. Transgenic plants of Prunus domestica L.cv. Stanley, clone C-5 inoculated with Plum pox virus (strain PPV-M), Prune dwarf virus, and Apple chlorotic leafspot virus will be evaluated for the presence of symptoms in leaves and fruits. The presence of idividual viruses in leaves of trees will be determined by ELISA and ISEM. The presence of PPV-M in trees resistant to PPV will be verified by RT-PCR. The resistance of transgenic plants to virus infection will be ascertained by determination of relative concentration of protein of individual viruses in leaves of plants, too. Transgenní švestka; stanovení rezistence; virus šarky švestky; virus zakrslosti slivoně; virus chlorotické skvrnitosti jabloně; ELISA; ISEM; RT-PCR; příznaky na plodech a listech
The evaluation and prevention of environmental and ecological risks related to introduction of genetically modified crops in the Czech Republic The project deals with the evaluation of environmental and ecological risks and benefits related to the introduction of genetically modified crops under conditions of the Czech Republic. Research is oriented on the problematic of hybridisation ant its consequences inside the crop-wild-weed complex, study of biotic and abiotic factors influencing transgene persistence in environment, influence of technological practices using GM crops onto the non-target organisms, and changes of weed species compositionof agrophytocenoses. Research will be oriented towards the specific problems in the Czech Republic and obtained results together with literature review will be used for the creation of methods for praxis, where principles of good agricultural ractices for GM crops growing will be formulated with regard of safe co-existence with other farming systems. geneticky modifikované plodiny; GMO; řepka; kukuřice; cukrovka; řepa; environmentální rizika; hybridizace; perzistence transgenů; predace semen; necílové organismy; arachnofauna; plevele; plevelná společenstva; glyphosate; glufosinate; koexistence	The evaluation and prevention of environmental and ecological risks related to introduction of genetically modified crops in the Czech Republic The project deals with the evaluation of environmental and ecological risks and benefits related to the introduction of genetically modified crops under conditions of the Czech Republic. Research is oriented on the problematic of hybridisation ant its consequences inside the crop-wild-weed complex, study of biotic and abiotic factors influencing transgene persistence in environment, influence of technological practices using GM crops onto the non-target organisms, and changes of weed species compositionof agrophytocenoses. Research will be oriented towards the specific problems in the Czech Republic and obtained results together with literature review will be used for the creation of methods for praxis, where principles of good agricultural ractices for GM crops growing will be formulated with regard of safe co-existence with other farming systems. geneticky modifikované plodiny; GMO; řepka; kukuřice; cukrovka; řepa; environmentální rizika; hybridizace; perzistence transgenů; predace semen; necílové organismy; arachnofauna; plevele; plevelná společenstva; glyphosate; glufosinate; koexistence
Financial models of measures of environmental care The aim is to suggest financial model of aspects of environemental care, the methods of evaluation ofenvironemental measures and methodical approach for evaluating used financial model. financial models; system of financing of environmental care; current system of financing environmental care evaluation; versions of financing models	Financial models of measures of environmental care The aim is to suggest financial model of aspects of environemental care, the methods of evaluation ofenvironemental measures and methodical approach for evaluating used financial model. financial models; system of financing of environmental care; current system of financing environmental care evaluation; versions of financing models
Voluntary tools for protection of environment and for policy of prevention and management of small and middle-sized enterprices in conection with Waste management plan of CR (Local activities ? global impact) The goals of sustainable development are not reachable without efficient change of models of production. It is necessary to optimise the usage of sources and to lower the production of waste. The multiple effect of changes in the models of production canThe international directives and the Czech national waste management plan should be keep on mind. The economical, social and environmental aspects should be named. Long-termed programs for lowering the quantity of produced waste should be created, the in Sustainable development; models of production; optimisation of usage of sources; lowering of waste production; models of consumption; voluntary tools of protection of environment; policy of prevention; small and middle-sized enterprises; Waste management	Voluntary tools for protection of environment and for policy of prevention and management of small and middle-sized enterprices in conection with Waste management plan of CR (Local activities ? global impact) The goals of sustainable development are not reachable without efficient change of models of production. It is necessary to optimise the usage of sources and to lower the production of waste. The multiple effect of changes in the models of production canThe international directives and the Czech national waste management plan should be keep on mind. The economical, social and environmental aspects should be named. Long-termed programs for lowering the quantity of produced waste should be created, the in Sustainable development; models of production; optimisation of usage of sources; lowering of waste production; models of consumption; voluntary tools of protection of environment; policy of prevention; small and middle-sized enterprises; Waste management
Application of Environmental Accounting on macro-economical and micro-economical level in condition of Czech Republic. Project focused on sustainable development process on macro-economical and micro-economical level. The subject of macro-economical part of project engage on using of macro-economical accounts SEEA 2003 evaluation of sustainable development in Czech repubOn micro-economical level the project focused on measuring of sustainable development on company level and on environmental accounting, environmental reporting, effectiveness of implementation of EMS. Component of the project is solving of binding betwee macro-economical account; SEEA 2003; EMS; environmental acccounting; environmental reporting	Application of Environmental Accounting on macro-economical and micro-economical level in condition of Czech Republic. Project focused on sustainable development process on macro-economical and micro-economical level. The subject of macro-economical part of project engage on using of macro-economical accounts SEEA 2003 evaluation of sustainable development in Czech repubOn micro-economical level the project focused on measuring of sustainable development on company level and on environmental accounting, environmental reporting, effectiveness of implementation of EMS. Component of the project is solving of binding betwee macro-economical account; SEEA 2003; EMS; environmental acccounting; environmental reporting
Economical efectivity of environmental care The aim is to analyze the efficiency of current system of environmental care in CZ and in EUThe project will suggest how to evaluate efficiency of environmental care and will analyze it.Focus on State Environmental Fund and the area of penalties for polluting the environment. Efficiency of environmental care; evaluation of the efficiency; penalties for polluting the environment	Economical efectivity of environmental care The aim is to analyze the efficiency of current system of environmental care in CZ and in EUThe project will suggest how to evaluate efficiency of environmental care and will analyze it.Focus on State Environmental Fund and the area of penalties for polluting the environment. Efficiency of environmental care; evaluation of the efficiency; penalties for polluting the environment
Environmental Accounting Aplication Efficient management of environmental protection require the improvement of the environmental information system. Connected with this improvement is the need to close the lead held by the EU members in the development of the System of environmental and eThe project is focused on the most immediate questions in this field and strives for an active integration of the national scientific community into interna-tional discussions related to this topic and into the harmonisation process of the relevant interThe objective of the project team is to evaluate developments and achievements in the areas of the creation and development of environmental accounting at the European and World levels. Stress will be placed on selected modules of the system, which are,applicable to the conditions of the CR. Project provides an opportunity to follow up on the results of project PPZP 320/4/98 "Possibilities for EA system introduction" which made the CR, at that time, the leader among Candidates countries in this field. Accounting; Environmental Accounting; Environmental Policy	Environmental Accounting Aplication Efficient management of environmental protection require the improvement of the environmental information system. Connected with this improvement is the need to close the lead held by the EU members in the development of the System of environmental and eThe project is focused on the most immediate questions in this field and strives for an active integration of the national scientific community into interna-tional discussions related to this topic and into the harmonisation process of the relevant interThe objective of the project team is to evaluate developments and achievements in the areas of the creation and development of environmental accounting at the European and World levels. Stress will be placed on selected modules of the system, which are,applicable to the conditions of the CR. Project provides an opportunity to follow up on the results of project PPZP 320/4/98 "Possibilities for EA system introduction" which made the CR, at that time, the leader among Candidates countries in this field. Accounting; Environmental Accounting; Environmental Policy
Optimalization of the environmental protection cost alternative approaches to understanding environmental protection costs & expenditures, its optimizationmacroeconomic consequences of spending sources on environmental protectionsystem of financing of the environmental protection; investigation of controlcosts functionssuggestions to optimization of the costs and improvement efficiency of its financing environmental economics and policy; financing environmental protection; environmental protection costs	Optimalization of the environmental protection cost alternative approaches to understanding environmental protection costs & expenditures, its optimizationmacroeconomic consequences of spending sources on environmental protectionsystem of financing of the environmental protection; investigation of controlcosts functionssuggestions to optimization of the costs and improvement efficiency of its financing environmental economics and policy; financing environmental protection; environmental protection costs
Research of Support for Sustainable Consumption and Production The project Research of Support for Sustainable Consumption and ŠProduction focuses on research of the directions of voluntary activities Šof the private sector in this field from the perspective of a producer. Research outputs will include identificat Sustainable Consumption	Research of Support for Sustainable Consumption and Production The project Research of Support for Sustainable Consumption and ŠProduction focuses on research of the directions of voluntary activities Šof the private sector in this field from the perspective of a producer. Research outputs will include identificat Sustainable Consumption
Support of Sustainable Production and Consumption Research The project is focussed on research of voluntary activities of the business sector in the area of sustainable production and consumption. The objective of the project is to develop proposal of voluntary tools programs from the perspective of sustainableand strategies for achieving change of population?s consumption patterns. In the framework of the project a methodology for evaluation of use of voluntary tools of sustainable production and consumption in the conditions of business sector will be createmechanisms of voluntary activities of business sector for selected systems of production and consumption and also proposal of their pilot implementation will be developed. The project as well includes 2 workshops where actors who can significantly influeconsumption and production will participate. sustainable production; sustainable consumption; voluntary tools; consumer; producer; environmental labelling; EMAS; environmental management systems; ecodesign; life-cycle assessment; LCA; integrated product policy; IPPC; green purchasing; procurement	Support of Sustainable Production and Consumption Research The project is focussed on research of voluntary activities of the business sector in the area of sustainable production and consumption. The objective of the project is to develop proposal of voluntary tools programs from the perspective of sustainableand strategies for achieving change of population?s consumption patterns. In the framework of the project a methodology for evaluation of use of voluntary tools of sustainable production and consumption in the conditions of business sector will be createmechanisms of voluntary activities of business sector for selected systems of production and consumption and also proposal of their pilot implementation will be developed. The project as well includes 2 workshops where actors who can significantly influeconsumption and production will participate. sustainable production; sustainable consumption; voluntary tools; consumer; producer; environmental labelling; EMAS; environmental management systems; ecodesign; life-cycle assessment; LCA; integrated product policy; IPPC; green purchasing; procurement
Human disaffection to the nature research Research on natural and anthropogenic environment action impact on human (especially children) sensation and behaviour; proposition solvable measure to optimize advancement.research on natural and anthropogenic environment action impact on mental and physical children development procedure recognition; data file creation - it can serve to future comparation;make a mental development and children behaviour indicators proposition; realize advancement evaluation and results deduction; positive turnover insection of upbringing, education and research biodiversity; sociobiology; sustainable development; prevention; upbringing; education; natural environment; knowledge; skills; habits	Human disaffection to the nature research Research on natural and anthropogenic environment action impact on human (especially children) sensation and behaviour; proposition solvable measure to optimize advancement.research on natural and anthropogenic environment action impact on mental and physical children development procedure recognition; data file creation - it can serve to future comparation;make a mental development and children behaviour indicators proposition; realize advancement evaluation and results deduction; positive turnover insection of upbringing, education and research biodiversity; sociobiology; sustainable development; prevention; upbringing; education; natural environment; knowledge; skills; habits
The Models of Influences of Environmental Policy to Macroeconomic Aggregates in the Czech Republic The aim of the project is the modelling of influences of environmental policy to macroeconomic variables in the Czech Republic. A component of the analysis is the investigation of relationship between the environmental policy and the social situation of Czech Republic; Environmental Policy; Macroaggregates; Models	The Models of Influences of Environmental Policy to Macroeconomic Aggregates in the Czech Republic The aim of the project is the modelling of influences of environmental policy to macroeconomic variables in the Czech Republic. A component of the analysis is the investigation of relationship between the environmental policy and the social situation of Czech Republic; Environmental Policy; Macroaggregates; Models
Effects of Economic Instruments on Environment Protection The main objective is to analyse and evaluate current state and utilization of economic intruments in environmental protection in the Czech Republic. The main focus of the project will be the methodology of economic instruments ex-post analysis, impacts economic intruments; methodology; effeciency; consumption	Effects of Economic Instruments on Environment Protection The main objective is to analyse and evaluate current state and utilization of economic intruments in environmental protection in the Czech Republic. The main focus of the project will be the methodology of economic instruments ex-post analysis, impacts economic intruments; methodology; effeciency; consumption
Damages caused by natural disasters The main goal of the project is to develop the economic clasification of damages coming from floods and to design effective possibilities for their long-term reduction. Project will be also focused on the economic analysis and evaluation of the current s natural disasters; clasification of flood damages; flood protection	Damages caused by natural disasters The main goal of the project is to develop the economic clasification of damages coming from floods and to design effective possibilities for their long-term reduction. Project will be also focused on the economic analysis and evaluation of the current s natural disasters; clasification of flood damages; flood protection
Evaluation of the landscape conservation economic effectivity and proposals of changes in transformation of present landscape conservation programs in connection with the European Landscape Convention and other international commitments. There are five basic aims: to create European Landscape Convention (ELC) economic analysis and analysis of programes with ELC connectedto create effectivity economic analysis of landscape enhancement programes and tools of land management in the Czech Republicto analyse landscape conservation in EU focussed on the legislative framework and economic aspectsto compare formal and administrative gaps with economic and legal rules of CR and EU European Landscape Convention; landscape management; landscape enhencement programes; land management; landscape scenery; landscape character	Evaluation of the landscape conservation economic effectivity and proposals of changes in transformation of present landscape conservation programs in connection with the European Landscape Convention and other international commitments. There are five basic aims: to create European Landscape Convention (ELC) economic analysis and analysis of programes with ELC connectedto create effectivity economic analysis of landscape enhancement programes and tools of land management in the Czech Republicto analyse landscape conservation in EU focussed on the legislative framework and economic aspectsto compare formal and administrative gaps with economic and legal rules of CR and EU European Landscape Convention; landscape management; landscape enhencement programes; land management; landscape scenery; landscape character
The extension of organic farming on the arable land in the landscape, bioproduction for wider range of food and fodder utilisation Project is oriented to increasing of influence of ecologic farming in the landscape and promoting its extension on the arable land by adapting of wheat growing technology to the plant requirements, regarding to quality of production from the point of vie organic farming; bioproduction; production quality; winter wheat; inter-row distance; bioindicator; food-processing; feed utilisation	The extension of organic farming on the arable land in the landscape, bioproduction for wider range of food and fodder utilisation Project is oriented to increasing of influence of ecologic farming in the landscape and promoting its extension on the arable land by adapting of wheat growing technology to the plant requirements, regarding to quality of production from the point of vie organic farming; bioproduction; production quality; winter wheat; inter-row distance; bioindicator; food-processing; feed utilisation
The impact of aperiodic changes in atmosphere on a human organism and the optimization of the biometeorological forecast model The biometeorological forecast (BMF) is a part of the prevention systém for meteorotropical diseases. The existing model is based on knowledge of medical sciences and potency of meteorology in 80's 20th century.The objective of this project is a recapitulation of present medical knowledge and development, testing and preparing for operation of a new BMF model with application a new meteorological methods. meteorosensitivity; meteorotropical diseases; biometeorological forecast	The impact of aperiodic changes in atmosphere on a human organism and the optimization of the biometeorological forecast model The biometeorological forecast (BMF) is a part of the prevention systém for meteorotropical diseases. The existing model is based on knowledge of medical sciences and potency of meteorology in 80's 20th century.The objective of this project is a recapitulation of present medical knowledge and development, testing and preparing for operation of a new BMF model with application a new meteorological methods. meteorosensitivity; meteorotropical diseases; biometeorological forecast
Environmental impact on the children health To determine the risk of long term effects and changes in air pollution on children´s health.Air pollution and children´s morbidity.Genetic factors of individual susceptibility to air pollution and children´s morbidity.Evaluation of total costs of healthinjuries. Air pollution; children´s health; children´s morbidity; individual susceptibility	Environmental impact on the children health To determine the risk of long term effects and changes in air pollution on children´s health.Air pollution and children´s morbidity.Genetic factors of individual susceptibility to air pollution and children´s morbidity.Evaluation of total costs of healthinjuries. Air pollution; children´s health; children´s morbidity; individual susceptibility
Material flows and sustainable resource management The project is focused on quantification of material flows within the socio-economic process covering defined geographical unit (country) and aims at sustainable resource management.It takes into account all material inputs such as extraction of mineralsand imports of materials accros national borders including sc. hidden flows. The aim of the analysis is to quantify material inputs, follow their processing in the framework of ecoThe research includes precise defining of material flows, their breakdown,identification of suitable units and development of material flow indicators including assessment of their relevance for state of the environment. material flow analysis; material intensity; Czech Republic	Material flows and sustainable resource management The project is focused on quantification of material flows within the socio-economic process covering defined geographical unit (country) and aims at sustainable resource management.It takes into account all material inputs such as extraction of mineralsand imports of materials accros national borders including sc. hidden flows. The aim of the analysis is to quantify material inputs, follow their processing in the framework of ecoThe research includes precise defining of material flows, their breakdown,identification of suitable units and development of material flow indicators including assessment of their relevance for state of the environment. material flow analysis; material intensity; Czech Republic
Minimization of products impact on environment Definition of main factors of chozen products minimization for environment during their life cycle. Waste; Recycling; Life cycle; Impact; Environment; Factors	Minimization of products impact on environment Definition of main factors of chozen products minimization for environment during their life cycle. Waste; Recycling; Life cycle; Impact; Environment; Factors
Production and distribution balances for selected wastes in conjuction with proposition of instrument´s mix to the prevence of rise material utilization of wastes The aim of the project is identification of the key´s elements and definition of relationships in the systemof waste management in the Czech republic, creation of production and distribution balances of thesystem of waste management and proposition of mix of administrative, economic, voluntary and otherinstruments that lead to the ensurance of aims of the Waste management plan in the Czech republic models; selected wastes; instruments; balances; prevention	Production and distribution balances for selected wastes in conjuction with proposition of instrument´s mix to the prevence of rise material utilization of wastes The aim of the project is identification of the key´s elements and definition of relationships in the systemof waste management in the Czech republic, creation of production and distribution balances of thesystem of waste management and proposition of mix of administrative, economic, voluntary and otherinstruments that lead to the ensurance of aims of the Waste management plan in the Czech republic models; selected wastes; instruments; balances; prevention
Elements and relationships in waste management Establishing of key elements and relationships in waste management. Balance model of wasteproduction and utilisation. Variant of waste managemnt instruments. Impact on environment. waste; waste management; systems; instrument; voluntary instrument; prevention; minimisation; indicator	Elements and relationships in waste management Establishing of key elements and relationships in waste management. Balance model of wasteproduction and utilisation. Variant of waste managemnt instruments. Impact on environment. waste; waste management; systems; instrument; voluntary instrument; prevention; minimisation; indicator
Preventive approach to the waste management and enhancement of application value of polymers: Utilization of recycled PET bottles for a nanocomposite materials preparation Recycled PET; Polymer nanocomposite; Montmorillonite. Organo-clay; Reheology	Preventive approach to the waste management and enhancement of application value of polymers: Utilization of recycled PET bottles for a nanocomposite materials preparation Recycled PET; Polymer nanocomposite; Montmorillonite. Organo-clay; Reheology
Biogeochemical cycles in the forest ecosystems of National park Šumava under changing natural condition The aim of project is identification of changes of biogeochemical cycles in forest ecosystems of National park Šumava owing to bark-beetle dieback and clear-cutting. Biogeochemical cycles will be measured in three catchments: 1. catchment with well growi biogeochemical cycles; spruce; bark-beetle dieback	Biogeochemical cycles in the forest ecosystems of National park Šumava under changing natural condition The aim of project is identification of changes of biogeochemical cycles in forest ecosystems of National park Šumava owing to bark-beetle dieback and clear-cutting. Biogeochemical cycles will be measured in three catchments: 1. catchment with well growi biogeochemical cycles; spruce; bark-beetle dieback
Development of methods of drought predictions and flood situations on the ground of infiltration and retention characteristics of soil in the CR. The aim of resolution of the project is to provide such information about the saturation rate of soil profile, the retention water capacity of soil, the infiltration and the soil permeability, the effective water capacity and the run-off, which should pedrought for smaller and bigger basins and generally for the whole area of the Czech Republic. The model AVISO, which works surgically in a daily step, will be exploited for the select number of climatological stations - it will be used for an identificatthe percipitiation and the evapotranspiration. The calibrated model system MIKE SHE is going to permit the areal simulation of the individual parameters of water regime ? the run-offs, the water capacity of soil, the depth of ground water level etc., wh saturation of soil profile; retention water capacity of soil; flood forecast; physiological drought; modeling system	Development of methods of drought predictions and flood situations on the ground of infiltration and retention characteristics of soil in the CR. The aim of resolution of the project is to provide such information about the saturation rate of soil profile, the retention water capacity of soil, the infiltration and the soil permeability, the effective water capacity and the run-off, which should pedrought for smaller and bigger basins and generally for the whole area of the Czech Republic. The model AVISO, which works surgically in a daily step, will be exploited for the select number of climatological stations - it will be used for an identificatthe percipitiation and the evapotranspiration. The calibrated model system MIKE SHE is going to permit the areal simulation of the individual parameters of water regime ? the run-offs, the water capacity of soil, the depth of ground water level etc., wh saturation of soil profile; retention water capacity of soil; flood forecast; physiological drought; modeling system
Geochemical Interactions of the Rock Environment with Areal Contaminants - The Use of 137Cs Indication Horizons for the Survey of Distribution, Bonding and Significance of Chosen Radionuclides and Metallic Elements in the Rocks of the Moravian-Silesian The survey aims to determine the extent, the level and the vertical distribution of chosen contaminants in the soils of various cultivation (forests, pastures, fields) in the area of theMoravian-Silesian Beskydy. The research will focus namely on radiogenic 137Cs (half-life of 30,1 years), U, Th, K and several other chosen elements (heavy metals). The connectedness between the contents of these contaminants and the granularity, the clayBesides, the possible ecological impacts of the soil contamination with respect to the potential entry of the anthropogenic compounds to the food chain are to be analyzed. The bottom sediments of the reservoirs of Morávka and Šance, which reflect the sed radiogenic elements; geochemical interactions; anthropogenic contamination; Moravian-Silesian Beskydy mountains	Geochemical Interactions of the Rock Environment with Areal Contaminants - The Use of 137Cs Indication Horizons for the Survey of Distribution, Bonding and Significance of Chosen Radionuclides and Metallic Elements in the Rocks of the Moravian-Silesian The survey aims to determine the extent, the level and the vertical distribution of chosen contaminants in the soils of various cultivation (forests, pastures, fields) in the area of theMoravian-Silesian Beskydy. The research will focus namely on radiogenic 137Cs (half-life of 30,1 years), U, Th, K and several other chosen elements (heavy metals). The connectedness between the contents of these contaminants and the granularity, the clayBesides, the possible ecological impacts of the soil contamination with respect to the potential entry of the anthropogenic compounds to the food chain are to be analyzed. The bottom sediments of the reservoirs of Morávka and Šance, which reflect the sed radiogenic elements; geochemical interactions; anthropogenic contamination; Moravian-Silesian Beskydy mountains
Paleogeographical, paleoclimatological and geochronological reconstruction of continental glaciation in Czechia Three partial topics (Correlation of glacial accumulations in Czechia using sedimentary-petrographical methods; Paleogeographic reconstruction of the glaciation in selected parts of Czechia; Geochronological correlation of glacial accumulations and landfresearch project, are designed in the framework of this project. All three topics are interesting scientifically with ambitions to brought new results and interpretations. The awaited outputs of partial topics are papers published in international impactjournals as well as in the regional scientific journals. The linkage of the local stratigraphic scheme with the surrounding and global schemes, based on the proxy data from deep marine environment and ice core records, is the further component goal of th Continental glaciation; Paleogeography; Geochronology; Paleoclimatology; Pleistocene; Reconstruction; Cosmogenic dating; Sedimentary petrology; Central Europe	Paleogeographical, paleoclimatological and geochronological reconstruction of continental glaciation in Czechia Three partial topics (Correlation of glacial accumulations in Czechia using sedimentary-petrographical methods; Paleogeographic reconstruction of the glaciation in selected parts of Czechia; Geochronological correlation of glacial accumulations and landfresearch project, are designed in the framework of this project. All three topics are interesting scientifically with ambitions to brought new results and interpretations. The awaited outputs of partial topics are papers published in international impactjournals as well as in the regional scientific journals. The linkage of the local stratigraphic scheme with the surrounding and global schemes, based on the proxy data from deep marine environment and ice core records, is the further component goal of th Continental glaciation; Paleogeography; Geochronology; Paleoclimatology; Pleistocene; Reconstruction; Cosmogenic dating; Sedimentary petrology; Central Europe
Area aspects and long-term monitoring system Collection of hydrological and chemical data from GEOMON network of fourteen small forest catchments following former projects will be the main program. All of the data will be acquired by a uniform sampling and analytical protocol. Fluxes of ecologicall Long-term environmental monitoring; forest catchments; element cycling; water chemistry; biogeochemistry	Area aspects and long-term monitoring system Collection of hydrological and chemical data from GEOMON network of fourteen small forest catchments following former projects will be the main program. All of the data will be acquired by a uniform sampling and analytical protocol. Fluxes of ecologicall Long-term environmental monitoring; forest catchments; element cycling; water chemistry; biogeochemistry
Water management revitalization and flood control The project solves issue of flood control by means of complex water management revitalisation of an area.The sense of water management revitalisation is to také measures on water courses and their floodplains full of party eliminating inauspicious changes caused by previous technicaly conceived river engineering.The project solved by means of methods of literature search, remonte sensing, geographical information systems, hydrological models and catalougue of retention elements landscape revitalisation; water management; flood control; water retention	Water management revitalization and flood control The project solves issue of flood control by means of complex water management revitalisation of an area.The sense of water management revitalisation is to také measures on water courses and their floodplains full of party eliminating inauspicious changes caused by previous technicaly conceived river engineering.The project solved by means of methods of literature search, remonte sensing, geographical information systems, hydrological models and catalougue of retention elements landscape revitalisation; water management; flood control; water retention
Research, development and testing new methods for OCP and PCDD and PCDF disposal from underground and waste water The main topic of investigation is comparison different approach for disposal OCP, PCDD and PCDF from underground and waste water. Optimal technological process is designed on the base of comparing the actual efficiency and the cost. OCP; PCDD; PCDF; waste water	Research, development and testing new methods for OCP and PCDD and PCDF disposal from underground and waste water The main topic of investigation is comparison different approach for disposal OCP, PCDD and PCDF from underground and waste water. Optimal technological process is designed on the base of comparing the actual efficiency and the cost. OCP; PCDD; PCDF; waste water
*Research of new methods, development and application of technologies for treatment of waters with high content of dissolved salts affecting environmental pollution. *Research of new methods, applicable within the Czech republic territory, for treatment of industrial waste waters and landfill leachates with high content of dissolved salts. Preferably the use of membrane separation methods with pressure driving force- membrane separation methods	*Research of new methods, development and application of technologies for treatment of waters with high content of dissolved salts affecting environmental pollution. *Research of new methods, applicable within the Czech republic territory, for treatment of industrial waste waters and landfill leachates with high content of dissolved salts. Preferably the use of membrane separation methods with pressure driving force- membrane separation methods
Assessment of the coal and industrial minerals mining impacts in Sokolov-Karlovy Vary area on the geological environment and rehabilitation of its basic functions Geological environment of Sokolov-Karlovy Vary area with world famous spas like Karlovy Vary has been seriously destroyed by tens of years long period of open cast brown coal and kaoline mining and processing. The main goals of the project are: 1) assess environmental assessment; rehabilitation; coal and industrial minerals mining; Sokolov-Karlovy Vary area	Assessment of the coal and industrial minerals mining impacts in Sokolov-Karlovy Vary area on the geological environment and rehabilitation of its basic functions Geological environment of Sokolov-Karlovy Vary area with world famous spas like Karlovy Vary has been seriously destroyed by tens of years long period of open cast brown coal and kaoline mining and processing. The main goals of the project are: 1) assess environmental assessment; rehabilitation; coal and industrial minerals mining; Sokolov-Karlovy Vary area
Methods of assessment of environmental data, information and indicators The aim of the project is to develop and propose an efficient system of assessment of environmental situation, i.e. driving forces of the pressure, state and impacts on the environment, and this by means of indicators.This system will improve deleveringof environmental information to the public, public administration and the enterpreneurs so that they would get environmental information which are meaningful, reliable and timely for them (i.e. in time when they are neIndicators will provide relevant information, which will serve as a basis for efficient measures. environmental information; decision process; indicators; mateial flow analysis	Methods of assessment of environmental data, information and indicators The aim of the project is to develop and propose an efficient system of assessment of environmental situation, i.e. driving forces of the pressure, state and impacts on the environment, and this by means of indicators.This system will improve deleveringof environmental information to the public, public administration and the enterpreneurs so that they would get environmental information which are meaningful, reliable and timely for them (i.e. in time when they are neIndicators will provide relevant information, which will serve as a basis for efficient measures. environmental information; decision process; indicators; mateial flow analysis
Intelligent methods for incresing of reliability of electrical networks The main objective of the research project is an increase in safety and reliability of operation of the electric power system by developing new intelligent methods. A reduction of black-out risk in the Czech Republic is very topical as well. Problems ofthe reliability in electric power engineering have been successfuly solved at the faculty of electrical engineering and computer science for several years. There has been established the statewide research workplace for the creation and categorisation ofthe databases of failures of distribution equipment and outages of supply at all voltage levels. From all over the Czech Republic and Slovakia the data are send from the particular regional distribution companies and that way is created an objectively predicative environment for the reliability computations of distribution systems. electric power engineering; reliability; failure; outage; database; black-out	Intelligent methods for incresing of reliability of electrical networks The main objective of the research project is an increase in safety and reliability of operation of the electric power system by developing new intelligent methods. A reduction of black-out risk in the Czech Republic is very topical as well. Problems ofthe reliability in electric power engineering have been successfuly solved at the faculty of electrical engineering and computer science for several years. There has been established the statewide research workplace for the creation and categorisation ofthe databases of failures of distribution equipment and outages of supply at all voltage levels. From all over the Czech Republic and Slovakia the data are send from the particular regional distribution companies and that way is created an objectively predicative environment for the reliability computations of distribution systems. electric power engineering; reliability; failure; outage; database; black-out
Intelligent Models, Algorithms, Methods and Tools for the Semantic Web (realization) The project at hand is a project integrating progresive theoretical disciplines of Computer Science with their practical applications. Its goal is to examine and develop theoretical backgrounds of the semantic web, mainly from the point of view of modernAI methods and methods of computing by nature, as e.i. special logics, artificial neural nets, evolutionary algorithms, datamining, etc., and to apply and verify selected methods of intelligent data and knowledge processing in that field. The results ofthe project are expected to be mainly: theoretical treatises, published in international journals and presented at international conferences; new algorithms for knowledge extraction from data, based on neural, cognitive, fuzzy and evolutionary approaches; prototypical implementations of these algorithms within a multiagent systems. The project is centered around 12 key researchers from 3 institutions and also includes 11 Ph. D. students. semantic web; XML; ontologies; agent technologies; multiagent systems; intelligent agents; description logic; computational intelligence; soft computing; computing by nature; datamining; software engineering	Intelligent Models, Algorithms, Methods and Tools for the Semantic Web (realization) The project at hand is a project integrating progresive theoretical disciplines of Computer Science with their practical applications. Its goal is to examine and develop theoretical backgrounds of the semantic web, mainly from the point of view of modernAI methods and methods of computing by nature, as e.i. special logics, artificial neural nets, evolutionary algorithms, datamining, etc., and to apply and verify selected methods of intelligent data and knowledge processing in that field. The results ofthe project are expected to be mainly: theoretical treatises, published in international journals and presented at international conferences; new algorithms for knowledge extraction from data, based on neural, cognitive, fuzzy and evolutionary approaches; prototypical implementations of these algorithms within a multiagent systems. The project is centered around 12 key researchers from 3 institutions and also includes 11 Ph. D. students. semantic web; XML; ontologies; agent technologies; multiagent systems; intelligent agents; description logic; computational intelligence; soft computing; computing by nature; datamining; software engineering
Methods for Intelligent Systems and Their Applications in Datamining and Natural Language Processing The project is focused on the development of methods for intelligent systems a their applications in machine learning, datamining, natural language processing, and computer vision. The research will benefit from a multidisciplinary approach based on thedevelopment and integration of new techniques and algorithms especially from the area of nature inspired computational models such as neural networks, decision trees, comparative inductive logic programming, Bayesian nets, extensible syntactic parsers, specialized automata, and grammars. In cooperation with commercial subjects the resulting algorithms will subsequently be implemented in practically usable systems and tested on benchmarks and real data. The project's achievements will find their use e.g.in computer linguistics, primarily in the design of grammar-checkers, natural language translators, and valency dictionaries; in computer vision (syntactic pattern recognition) and information retrieval. Machine Learning; Datamining; Natural Language Processing; Neural Networks; Decision Trees; Inductive Logic Programming; Bayesian Nets; Valency Reduction Analysis; Restarting Automata; Grammar-Checker; Machine Translation	Methods for Intelligent Systems and Their Applications in Datamining and Natural Language Processing The project is focused on the development of methods for intelligent systems a their applications in machine learning, datamining, natural language processing, and computer vision. The research will benefit from a multidisciplinary approach based on thedevelopment and integration of new techniques and algorithms especially from the area of nature inspired computational models such as neural networks, decision trees, comparative inductive logic programming, Bayesian nets, extensible syntactic parsers, specialized automata, and grammars. In cooperation with commercial subjects the resulting algorithms will subsequently be implemented in practically usable systems and tested on benchmarks and real data. The project's achievements will find their use e.g.in computer linguistics, primarily in the design of grammar-checkers, natural language translators, and valency dictionaries; in computer vision (syntactic pattern recognition) and information retrieval. Machine Learning; Datamining; Natural Language Processing; Neural Networks; Decision Trees; Inductive Logic Programming; Bayesian Nets; Valency Reduction Analysis; Restarting Automata; Grammar-Checker; Machine Translation
DiENaLS: Diagnostic and Evaluation Tools for Linguistic Software With the ongoing development of application software for natural language processing, the following requirements gain crucial importance: the definition of a broad enough area of Czech language (lexicon, grammar, style) to be covered, to an appropriate extent, by any such application; the existence of proofing and evaluation tools for checking the quality of the coverage. For the Czech language, there exists no language source or software tool meeting these requirements. Therefore, the aim of the proposed project is: to define a methodology of the build-up of a broad-coverage test-suite for Czech; to design and implement a database serving for the creation, storing, an easy application, maintenance and portability of the test-suite. software for natural language processing; proofing and evaluation tools; test suites; classification and hierarchy of language phenomena; representativity of a test suite; coverage of language; coverage of errors in language	DiENaLS: Diagnostic and Evaluation Tools for Linguistic Software With the ongoing development of application software for natural language processing, the following requirements gain crucial importance: the definition of a broad enough area of Czech language (lexicon, grammar, style) to be covered, to an appropriate extent, by any such application; the existence of proofing and evaluation tools for checking the quality of the coverage. For the Czech language, there exists no language source or software tool meeting these requirements. Therefore, the aim of the proposed project is: to define a methodology of the build-up of a broad-coverage test-suite for Czech; to design and implement a database serving for the creation, storing, an easy application, maintenance and portability of the test-suite. software for natural language processing; proofing and evaluation tools; test suites; classification and hierarchy of language phenomena; representativity of a test suite; coverage of language; coverage of errors in language
BADDYR: Bayesian Adaptive Distributed Dynamic Decision Making Aim 1: Development of implementable theory of Bayesian adaptive distributed decision making (DM) with multiple participants and multiple-criteria. It will provide: Fully probabilistic design (FPD) of adaptive strategies respecting changing environment and group aims. Methodology of combining experience, observed data, statistics and individual aims. Aim 2: Transformation of the theory into a set of generic, easy-to-tailor algorithms implemented in an open software system. It will contain algorithms for:dynamic mixtures supporting FPD of distributed DM; universal approximation property and relative simplicity of their tailoring motivate this choice; automatic translation of technical knowlwedge into probabilistic description and solutions of FPD; and software for algorithmic development and its transfer to industry verified by creating an industrial version. dynamic decision making; Bayesian decision making; multiple participant decision making; multicriterial decision making; adaptive systems; algorithms and software; industrial implementation	BADDYR: Bayesian Adaptive Distributed Dynamic Decision Making Aim 1: Development of implementable theory of Bayesian adaptive distributed decision making (DM) with multiple participants and multiple-criteria. It will provide: Fully probabilistic design (FPD) of adaptive strategies respecting changing environment and group aims. Methodology of combining experience, observed data, statistics and individual aims. Aim 2: Transformation of the theory into a set of generic, easy-to-tailor algorithms implemented in an open software system. It will contain algorithms for:dynamic mixtures supporting FPD of distributed DM; universal approximation property and relative simplicity of their tailoring motivate this choice; automatic translation of technical knowlwedge into probabilistic description and solutions of FPD; and software for algorithmic development and its transfer to industry verified by creating an industrial version. dynamic decision making; Bayesian decision making; multiple participant decision making; multicriterial decision making; adaptive systems; algorithms and software; industrial implementation
Intelligent decision support of diagnosis and therapy in nuclear mediciny by Bayesian processing of uncertain data and probabilistic mixtures First version of a decision support system using biophysical and radiological data was practically tested. Some of its insufficiencies indicate improvement of the methodology of mixture analysis and extension of the data set by biochemical, histologicaland other medical quantities. The aims: 1. Extension of theory and algorithms of Bayesian mixture analysis for consistent processing of discrete quantities and data with missing blocks. Result: the set of flexible software tools for implementation of mixture analysis as a method to get and manage information about a system using the system-generated data. 2. Collection and systemization of data from more patient examinations. Result:data set for the mixture analysis and for further use by doctors for research and clinic. 3. Development and implementation of the advisory module with algorithmic and software solutions of associated tasks. Result: software system for practical use. 4. Experimental run and testing of the advisory system. probabilistic mixture; Bayesian identification; decision support; nuclear medicine; thyroid carcinom; data analysis; algorithms and software; implementation	Intelligent decision support of diagnosis and therapy in nuclear mediciny by Bayesian processing of uncertain data and probabilistic mixtures First version of a decision support system using biophysical and radiological data was practically tested. Some of its insufficiencies indicate improvement of the methodology of mixture analysis and extension of the data set by biochemical, histologicaland other medical quantities. The aims: 1. Extension of theory and algorithms of Bayesian mixture analysis for consistent processing of discrete quantities and data with missing blocks. Result: the set of flexible software tools for implementation of mixture analysis as a method to get and manage information about a system using the system-generated data. 2. Collection and systemization of data from more patient examinations. Result:data set for the mixture analysis and for further use by doctors for research and clinic. 3. Development and implementation of the advisory module with algorithmic and software solutions of associated tasks. Result: software system for practical use. 4. Experimental run and testing of the advisory system. probabilistic mixture; Bayesian identification; decision support; nuclear medicine; thyroid carcinom; data analysis; algorithms and software; implementation
Digital video-senzoric system of reconnaissance robot The project focuses on the problem of mobile robotics. It researches and develops methods for a digital wireless transfer of video and other data from the video-sensoric system of a reconnaissance robot and their visualization and integration in the userinterface at the operator seat. The results of the project will be evaluated in a real-world environment using the platform of the reconnaissance robot Orpheus. The project is divided into three work packages: wireless data transfer, telepresentation based user interface, and integration of the data transfer module in the user interface. The goal of the project is to improve the Orpheus platform so that it is competitive with the future top-class reconnaissance robots used worldwide while adapting it to real operations. To reach these goals, new methods for robust digital wireless transfer of video and other data and an innovative telepresentation user interface with the feature-extraction capabilities will be developed. robotics; vizualization; signal processing; channel equalization; wireless communication; image processing; computer vision; user interface	Digital video-senzoric system of reconnaissance robot The project focuses on the problem of mobile robotics. It researches and develops methods for a digital wireless transfer of video and other data from the video-sensoric system of a reconnaissance robot and their visualization and integration in the userinterface at the operator seat. The results of the project will be evaluated in a real-world environment using the platform of the reconnaissance robot Orpheus. The project is divided into three work packages: wireless data transfer, telepresentation based user interface, and integration of the data transfer module in the user interface. The goal of the project is to improve the Orpheus platform so that it is competitive with the future top-class reconnaissance robots used worldwide while adapting it to real operations. To reach these goals, new methods for robust digital wireless transfer of video and other data and an innovative telepresentation user interface with the feature-extraction capabilities will be developed. robotics; vizualization; signal processing; channel equalization; wireless communication; image processing; computer vision; user interface
Artificial inteligence methods in diagnostics from medical images The project is concerned with development of computer assistant diagnostic methods for medical ultrasound imaging, based on image processing methods, texture analysis, and pattern matching theory. We shall focus on the diagnostic of thyroid gland (such as the autoimmune lymphocytic disease), liver, and other accessible organs. We shall use texture analysis of the sonograms with systematic construction of the descriptors. We will also develop a method of elastographic analysis from a video-sequence of ultrasound images taken in the course of the deformation caused by the pressure from the sensing probe. This algorithm will use elastic image sequence registration method with a developed high-dimensionality mutual-information based similarity criterion, specially developed for this application. The method will distinguish between tissue types (e.g. tumor versus healthy tissue) according to their stiffness. Implemented algorithms will be tested on real clinical data. ultrasound; medical; texture; classification; image processing; autoimmune lymphocytic disease; thyroid gland; liver; image registration; elastography; deformation; mutual information; mechanical stiffness; tumor; detection	Artificial inteligence methods in diagnostics from medical images The project is concerned with development of computer assistant diagnostic methods for medical ultrasound imaging, based on image processing methods, texture analysis, and pattern matching theory. We shall focus on the diagnostic of thyroid gland (such as the autoimmune lymphocytic disease), liver, and other accessible organs. We shall use texture analysis of the sonograms with systematic construction of the descriptors. We will also develop a method of elastographic analysis from a video-sequence of ultrasound images taken in the course of the deformation caused by the pressure from the sensing probe. This algorithm will use elastic image sequence registration method with a developed high-dimensionality mutual-information based similarity criterion, specially developed for this application. The method will distinguish between tissue types (e.g. tumor versus healthy tissue) according to their stiffness. Implemented algorithms will be tested on real clinical data. ultrasound; medical; texture; classification; image processing; autoimmune lymphocytic disease; thyroid gland; liver; image registration; elastography; deformation; mutual information; mechanical stiffness; tumor; detection
Resources and Tools for Information Systems The project "Resources and Tools for Information Systems" focuses on fulltext information systems (containing both written and spoken materials) in Czech (where standard methods fail due to the different type of languages they have been developed for). The project aims to strenghten and improve current methods for morphological analysis of Czech, in order to attain higher precison in identifying lexical units and in some cases also their meaning. The project will use state-of-the-art statistical technology and machine learning based on linguistically annotated data. Within the project, such data will be prepared (at a fraction of the usual cost) by conversion of older resources, and tools will be created (based on the resulting larger corpus) that would have parameters needed for a successful application in end-user information systems. information systems; fulltext search; question-answering systems; human-machine communication (in Czech); morphological analysis; tagging; annotated corpora	Resources and Tools for Information Systems The project "Resources and Tools for Information Systems" focuses on fulltext information systems (containing both written and spoken materials) in Czech (where standard methods fail due to the different type of languages they have been developed for). The project aims to strenghten and improve current methods for morphological analysis of Czech, in order to attain higher precison in identifying lexical units and in some cases also their meaning. The project will use state-of-the-art statistical technology and machine learning based on linguistically annotated data. Within the project, such data will be prepared (at a fraction of the usual cost) by conversion of older resources, and tools will be created (based on the resulting larger corpus) that would have parameters needed for a successful application in end-user information systems. information systems; fulltext search; question-answering systems; human-machine communication (in Czech); morphological analysis; tagging; annotated corpora
Integration of language resources for information extraction from natural texts The project "Integration of Language Resources for Information Extraction from Natural Texts" focuses on the problem of current heterogeneity of language data intended for linguistic research. The result of the project will be a unified system for storing and using language resources together with robust tools enabling effective text processing. All the available language resources will be converted into the new system. The project is concerned also with detection and classification of "named entities"in Czech texts, a subject not yet resolved for the Czech language. Its inclusion into the unified data system will improve results of automatic language processing, especially in the field of information retrieval from large text databases. nformation systems; language corpora; morphological dictionary; named entities; XML; language resources; natural language processing	Integration of language resources for information extraction from natural texts The project "Integration of Language Resources for Information Extraction from Natural Texts" focuses on the problem of current heterogeneity of language data intended for linguistic research. The result of the project will be a unified system for storing and using language resources together with robust tools enabling effective text processing. All the available language resources will be converted into the new system. The project is concerned also with detection and classification of "named entities"in Czech texts, a subject not yet resolved for the Czech language. Its inclusion into the unified data system will improve results of automatic language processing, especially in the field of information retrieval from large text databases. nformation systems; language corpora; morphological dictionary; named entities; XML; language resources; natural language processing
Automatic 3D Virtual Model Builder from Photographs In this project, a set of theoretically well developed computer vision methods and algorithms will be developed for constructing a three-dimensional virtual model from a set of photographs of an object acquired by an uncalibrated hand-held camera. We will assume large objects of possibly complex shape. The proposed method will be able to construct 3D models even from data that was originally not acquired for the purpose of 3D reconstruction. The proposed project is to support research towards the proofof concept. The problem is broad enough for any substantial progress on its solution to bring a significant progress to the field of Computer Vision. The results of this projects will be tailored to the needs of a professional user, for instance, an architect, criminalist, sculptor or designer, who wants to create a 3D model of a large object. We will seek partners who will help us bring such 3D photography to potential users. computer vision; virtual reality; three-dimensional model; reconstruction; stereovision; autocalibration	Automatic 3D Virtual Model Builder from Photographs In this project, a set of theoretically well developed computer vision methods and algorithms will be developed for constructing a three-dimensional virtual model from a set of photographs of an object acquired by an uncalibrated hand-held camera. We will assume large objects of possibly complex shape. The proposed method will be able to construct 3D models even from data that was originally not acquired for the purpose of 3D reconstruction. The proposed project is to support research towards the proofof concept. The problem is broad enough for any substantial progress on its solution to bring a significant progress to the field of Computer Vision. The results of this projects will be tailored to the needs of a professional user, for instance, an architect, criminalist, sculptor or designer, who wants to create a 3D model of a large object. We will seek partners who will help us bring such 3D photography to potential users. computer vision; virtual reality; three-dimensional model; reconstruction; stereovision; autocalibration
Multi-camera system for modeling and recognition of events In this project a set of theoretically well established methods for modeling and recognition of events will be developed. The system will use multiple cameras that will observe scene from different perspectives. It will be based on consumer HW and essentialy transportable and flexible. Newly developed event representation will alow user-defined expected event to be recognized. Moreover, with long-term installation, the system will learn knowledge about usual events autonomously and will recognize an unusual event then. Understanding of the dynamic events allows development of the VirtualEditor that will be switching between cameras depending on the scene context. A multicamera system with above specified functionality may be applied in homeland security applications, video surveillance, tele-presence, tele-teaching, human-machine interfacing and others. computer vision; event/object recognition; camera network; virtual editor; tele-presence; tele-teaching	Multi-camera system for modeling and recognition of events In this project a set of theoretically well established methods for modeling and recognition of events will be developed. The system will use multiple cameras that will observe scene from different perspectives. It will be based on consumer HW and essentialy transportable and flexible. Newly developed event representation will alow user-defined expected event to be recognized. Moreover, with long-term installation, the system will learn knowledge about usual events autonomously and will recognize an unusual event then. Understanding of the dynamic events allows development of the VirtualEditor that will be switching between cameras depending on the scene context. A multicamera system with above specified functionality may be applied in homeland security applications, video surveillance, tele-presence, tele-teaching, human-machine interfacing and others. computer vision; event/object recognition; camera network; virtual editor; tele-presence; tele-teaching
Intelligent methods for evaluation of long-term EEG recordings In this project, a set of theoretically well developed methods and algorithms for automated processing and evaluation of long-term EEG records. Developed methods will be implemented. Implemented system will allow automated detection and classification ofspecific graphoelements (parts of signals with characteristic shape and defined diagnostic value) in long-term EEG record. A database of interpreted EEG segments will be developed. The proposed project is to support especially interconnection of basic research in the area of artificial intelligence with application of developed methods to medicine. Real world task provides platform for verification of functionality of proposed methods as well. The project results will be directly applicable at the Neurology department of the co-holder as well as at similar departments in other hospitals. Further the developed methods will be applicable to processing of similar type of data from other areas (e.g. technical). EEG; automated signal processing; intelligent methods; classification; segmentation	Intelligent methods for evaluation of long-term EEG recordings In this project, a set of theoretically well developed methods and algorithms for automated processing and evaluation of long-term EEG records. Developed methods will be implemented. Implemented system will allow automated detection and classification ofspecific graphoelements (parts of signals with characteristic shape and defined diagnostic value) in long-term EEG record. A database of interpreted EEG segments will be developed. The proposed project is to support especially interconnection of basic research in the area of artificial intelligence with application of developed methods to medicine. Real world task provides platform for verification of functionality of proposed methods as well. The project results will be directly applicable at the Neurology department of the co-holder as well as at similar departments in other hospitals. Further the developed methods will be applicable to processing of similar type of data from other areas (e.g. technical). EEG; automated signal processing; intelligent methods; classification; segmentation
Relational machine learning for analysis of biomedical data There is no data mining method enabling both for robust knowledge representation/inference on the level of 1st order logic and for uncertainty in the treated data since both types of problems are treated separately. Our project aims to join existing representation frameworks with intention to design and implement an efficient tool for automated construction of hypothesis about the data utilizing complex but uncertain expert knowledge. Suggested methodology builds on the original theretical results of the proposer's team representing an attempt to merge probabilistic inference with relational logics. The designed approach/ tools will be verified when analysing original medical data inherently lacking uniform structure and requiring complex expert knowledge for their interpretation. This knowledge will be specified in close cooperation with the co-proposing team of medical faculty. The data analysis results will improve understanding of complex biomedical processes, eg. gene expression. relational machine learning; multicriterial decisison making; knowledge reprezentation; domain knowledge; data mining	Relational machine learning for analysis of biomedical data There is no data mining method enabling both for robust knowledge representation/inference on the level of 1st order logic and for uncertainty in the treated data since both types of problems are treated separately. Our project aims to join existing representation frameworks with intention to design and implement an efficient tool for automated construction of hypothesis about the data utilizing complex but uncertain expert knowledge. Suggested methodology builds on the original theretical results of the proposer's team representing an attempt to merge probabilistic inference with relational logics. The designed approach/ tools will be verified when analysing original medical data inherently lacking uniform structure and requiring complex expert knowledge for their interpretation. This knowledge will be specified in close cooperation with the co-proposing team of medical faculty. The data analysis results will improve understanding of complex biomedical processes, eg. gene expression. relational machine learning; multicriterial decisison making; knowledge reprezentation; domain knowledge; data mining
Hierarchical analysis of complex data The project is focused on data and knowledge management, esp. on data mining. The aim is to pursue basic and applied research in hierarchical analysis if complex data and its applications. Basic research consists in investigation of theoretical foundations and algorithms. Results will be published in prestigious journals and conference proceedings and will be tested in real applications of the co-applicant. A software will be developed implementing the methods under investigation and interface to various systems used in applications. The software tool plus a userŮs manual will make possible real applications of the developed methods, esp. data analysis in various fields like management, customer segmentation, control of resources, risk analysis. Testing will be performed on large data of a potential user. A Center for data analysis will be established as a part of the project. relational data; data mining; database; cluster analysis; formal concept analysis; hierarchical analysis; hierarchical diagram	Hierarchical analysis of complex data The project is focused on data and knowledge management, esp. on data mining. The aim is to pursue basic and applied research in hierarchical analysis if complex data and its applications. Basic research consists in investigation of theoretical foundations and algorithms. Results will be published in prestigious journals and conference proceedings and will be tested in real applications of the co-applicant. A software will be developed implementing the methods under investigation and interface to various systems used in applications. The software tool plus a userŮs manual will make possible real applications of the developed methods, esp. data analysis in various fields like management, customer segmentation, control of resources, risk analysis. Testing will be performed on large data of a potential user. A Center for data analysis will be established as a part of the project. relational data; data mining; database; cluster analysis; formal concept analysis; hierarchical analysis; hierarchical diagram
Multimodal human sign language and speech processing for man-machine communication The aim of the proposed project is to support audio speech recognition systems with visual recognition and apply information retrieval method on the recognition results. Multimodal audio-visual recognition will be employed in the task of sign language recognition and used to support information retrieval from video and audio recordings. The language we are interested in is Czech. Three tasks will be solved during recognition: audio continuous speech recognition, visual speech recognition, and audio-visual methods (classifiers) merging or combination. In case of sign language the objective is also the sign language synthesis. We suppose that we will be able to implement the sign-language-to-speech translation. High quality speech synthesis already developed at UWB will be used. Recognition techniques will be followed with information retrieval to enable talk content identification even from non-perfectly recognized word sequences. Computational linguistics will be used for translation. sign language processing; multimodal continuous speech recognition; information retrieval	Multimodal human sign language and speech processing for man-machine communication The aim of the proposed project is to support audio speech recognition systems with visual recognition and apply information retrieval method on the recognition results. Multimodal audio-visual recognition will be employed in the task of sign language recognition and used to support information retrieval from video and audio recordings. The language we are interested in is Czech. Three tasks will be solved during recognition: audio continuous speech recognition, visual speech recognition, and audio-visual methods (classifiers) merging or combination. In case of sign language the objective is also the sign language synthesis. We suppose that we will be able to implement the sign-language-to-speech translation. High quality speech synthesis already developed at UWB will be used. Recognition techniques will be followed with information retrieval to enable talk content identification even from non-perfectly recognized word sequences. Computational linguistics will be used for translation. sign language processing; multimodal continuous speech recognition; information retrieval
Mobile Spatial Data Acquisition for Real-Time Mapping The goal of the project is development of ambient mobile intelligence in infrastructure implementation for spatial data acquisition. These infrastructures shall be connected to distributed GIS with set of services for intelligent data processing acquiredfrom real-time survey mapping. The research is aimed at drawing support of 4 key spatial data acquisition methods using mobile communication tools: - mapping of spatial configuration using component sketch system, - in field mapping defined by mappers mobility, - change of thematic visualisation in relation to attribute modification of thematic features in field, - "on-line" photodocumentation filling to geodatabase for support of subsequent off field mapping. Designed system based on Open Source SW, complying to ISO, OGS and W3C standards shallbe created through analysis of cognitive mapping models and data acquisition, modern techniques of cartographic visualisation on mobile communication tools and web geodata services. Ambient Mobile Inteligence; spatial data acquisition; COGO; GIS; real-time mapping; mobile communication tolls; semantic-geometrical corrections; changes of thematic visualisation in real-time	Mobile Spatial Data Acquisition for Real-Time Mapping The goal of the project is development of ambient mobile intelligence in infrastructure implementation for spatial data acquisition. These infrastructures shall be connected to distributed GIS with set of services for intelligent data processing acquiredfrom real-time survey mapping. The research is aimed at drawing support of 4 key spatial data acquisition methods using mobile communication tools: - mapping of spatial configuration using component sketch system, - in field mapping defined by mappers mobility, - change of thematic visualisation in relation to attribute modification of thematic features in field, - "on-line" photodocumentation filling to geodatabase for support of subsequent off field mapping. Designed system based on Open Source SW, complying to ISO, OGS and W3C standards shallbe created through analysis of cognitive mapping models and data acquisition, modern techniques of cartographic visualisation on mobile communication tools and web geodata services. Ambient Mobile Inteligence; spatial data acquisition; COGO; GIS; real-time mapping; mobile communication tolls; semantic-geometrical corrections; changes of thematic visualisation in real-time
Strategic control of the systems with multiagents The project covers research, development and laboratory testing of methods and systems for hierarchical, distributed and multi-processor control of autonomous devices - mobile robots. Developed methods and technical approaches will be verified using laboratory model with a group of mobile robots that will be equipped with embedded control systems, detection subsystems and energy management subsystems and that will communicate with a supervisory computer via wireless communication channel. Implemented multi-agent control technology will enable a real-time control of relatively large number of mobile devices in dynamically varying environment. Description methods of mobile robots' movements, analysis and synthesis of strategical movements for system integration, planning and decision making methods of movement control will be verified using simulations, implemented and tested with physical model of real system in laboratory. embedded system; measurement system; energy management; wireless communication; mobile robot; control system; agent-technology of control; position scanning; movement description; strategy of movements; rules database; decicion process; simulation	Strategic control of the systems with multiagents The project covers research, development and laboratory testing of methods and systems for hierarchical, distributed and multi-processor control of autonomous devices - mobile robots. Developed methods and technical approaches will be verified using laboratory model with a group of mobile robots that will be equipped with embedded control systems, detection subsystems and energy management subsystems and that will communicate with a supervisory computer via wireless communication channel. Implemented multi-agent control technology will enable a real-time control of relatively large number of mobile devices in dynamically varying environment. Description methods of mobile robots' movements, analysis and synthesis of strategical movements for system integration, planning and decision making methods of movement control will be verified using simulations, implemented and tested with physical model of real system in laboratory. embedded system; measurement system; energy management; wireless communication; mobile robot; control system; agent-technology of control; position scanning; movement description; strategy of movements; rules database; decicion process; simulation
Logic and Artificial Intelligence in the area of Multiagent Systems The goal of the project is research in the area of formalised methods of process modelling enabling us to specify, model, predict and control behaviour of autonomous intelligent agents in various situations incl. critical states, in which the system maytend towards chaotic behaviour. We will concentrate on the development of AI methods based on a highly expressive logical system, namely transparent intensional logic (TIL). Formal language has to be precisely defined not only from the syntactic point ofview but also provided with a rigorous semantics. In the area of knowledge representation we will address the problem of an adequate modelling of particular agents' explicit knowledge, which respects limited inference capabilities of the agents (with bounded resources: space, time and software facilities). Knowledge management will handle heterogenous data incl. space and temporal data. We will also address the problem of reliability and effectiveness of the design. artificial intelligence; logical analysis; knowledge representation; system integration; information technology; geoinformation technology; space and temporal data; multiagent systems; vague and incomplete information	Logic and Artificial Intelligence in the area of Multiagent Systems The goal of the project is research in the area of formalised methods of process modelling enabling us to specify, model, predict and control behaviour of autonomous intelligent agents in various situations incl. critical states, in which the system maytend towards chaotic behaviour. We will concentrate on the development of AI methods based on a highly expressive logical system, namely transparent intensional logic (TIL). Formal language has to be precisely defined not only from the syntactic point ofview but also provided with a rigorous semantics. In the area of knowledge representation we will address the problem of an adequate modelling of particular agents' explicit knowledge, which respects limited inference capabilities of the agents (with bounded resources: space, time and software facilities). Knowledge management will handle heterogenous data incl. space and temporal data. We will also address the problem of reliability and effectiveness of the design. artificial intelligence; logical analysis; knowledge representation; system integration; information technology; geoinformation technology; space and temporal data; multiagent systems; vague and incomplete information
IP based navigation and logistic systems The method of differential corrections increases accuracy of determined localisation of points. This method requires building of GNSS technology permanent stations network. For this object is needed: specification of data transfer to data and sending servers, creation of operation software; solution of provision error-free process and data protection questions; creation of software for processing of results in the postprocessing mode. global navigation; satellite systems; postprocessing; direffential corection	IP based navigation and logistic systems The method of differential corrections increases accuracy of determined localisation of points. This method requires building of GNSS technology permanent stations network. For this object is needed: specification of data transfer to data and sending servers, creation of operation software; solution of provision error-free process and data protection questions; creation of software for processing of results in the postprocessing mode. global navigation; satellite systems; postprocessing; direffential corection
Integrated information systém for monitoring, analyses and prediction of deformation dynamic in geosystems Project is aimed to develop an automatic system for monitoring and processing of data about deformation events within geomaterials of shallow parts of Earth's crust. Deformation of unstable slope rock mass will be preferred, yet results obtained for themwill also be useful in other branches of Geodynamics. Besides acquisition and error-proof flow of big data amounts, consequent data processing and evaluation will be approached with special care, including custom-optimised outputs. Data processing method will be focused to reveal information hidden from linear analytic tools. Tools of non-linear science and of fuzzy logic will be applied to the existing models, especially the holistic, phenomenological ones, of stability failure of rockslope should beenhanced biz the results obtained, and to applied in diagnosis and prognostication of the process in question. On-line, Internet accesses to the central database and processing unit will be enabled as for authorised users. integrated multidisciplin information systém; on-line diagnostic; customize output	Integrated information systém for monitoring, analyses and prediction of deformation dynamic in geosystems Project is aimed to develop an automatic system for monitoring and processing of data about deformation events within geomaterials of shallow parts of Earth's crust. Deformation of unstable slope rock mass will be preferred, yet results obtained for themwill also be useful in other branches of Geodynamics. Besides acquisition and error-proof flow of big data amounts, consequent data processing and evaluation will be approached with special care, including custom-optimised outputs. Data processing method will be focused to reveal information hidden from linear analytic tools. Tools of non-linear science and of fuzzy logic will be applied to the existing models, especially the holistic, phenomenological ones, of stability failure of rockslope should beenhanced biz the results obtained, and to applied in diagnosis and prognostication of the process in question. On-line, Internet accesses to the central database and processing unit will be enabled as for authorised users. integrated multidisciplin information systém; on-line diagnostic; customize output
Applied research of secure internet communication with remote data terminal equipment in energetics Remote scanning of electricity meters at suppliers and certain groups of consumers is requested by law at present. Data from electricity meters are important both from the view of business and power network control. The aim of this project is to find thepossibilities how to utilize the Internet for remote data reading and control of electricity meters, meters quality of voltage and common remote control. These elements can create complex terminal unit. This unit will be communicate to business and dispatcher systems. However, the utilization of new communication brings a series of new problems. These problems concern above all the data security, protection of electricity meters, protection of dispatcher or telemetric systems, data transfer protocols,disturbances, operation near power devices. Transferred data are very important from the view of business, so high degree of security is required. Security and encryption of the data transfer represent one of the main problems. remote data aqusition; telemetric system; quality of supply voltage; remote terminal unit; RTU; secure data communication	Applied research of secure internet communication with remote data terminal equipment in energetics Remote scanning of electricity meters at suppliers and certain groups of consumers is requested by law at present. Data from electricity meters are important both from the view of business and power network control. The aim of this project is to find thepossibilities how to utilize the Internet for remote data reading and control of electricity meters, meters quality of voltage and common remote control. These elements can create complex terminal unit. This unit will be communicate to business and dispatcher systems. However, the utilization of new communication brings a series of new problems. These problems concern above all the data security, protection of electricity meters, protection of dispatcher or telemetric systems, data transfer protocols,disturbances, operation near power devices. Transferred data are very important from the view of business, so high degree of security is required. Security and encryption of the data transfer represent one of the main problems. remote data aqusition; telemetric system; quality of supply voltage; remote terminal unit; RTU; secure data communication
Research into a new generation of infusion pumps with central management system The aim of the project is the research into and a verification of a universal communication and management system that will be applicable in sensitive hospital environment and will be capable of reliable communication with mobile medical apparatus in this difficult environment, managing it and saving obtained information for possible further processing. The designed system will be able to communicate in user-friendly way with attending staff, to report failures and limit states of instruments disturbingthe patients. The features of the designed system will be verified experimentally on a new generation of infusion pumps with remote control management and with centralized acquisition and storage of information about the medical treatment and about thebasic life functions of patients. The realized applied research will speed up the further development of a new generation of medical apparatus, which will then be integrated as part of a remote-access medical information system. data communication; wire-less network; infusion pump	Research into a new generation of infusion pumps with central management system The aim of the project is the research into and a verification of a universal communication and management system that will be applicable in sensitive hospital environment and will be capable of reliable communication with mobile medical apparatus in this difficult environment, managing it and saving obtained information for possible further processing. The designed system will be able to communicate in user-friendly way with attending staff, to report failures and limit states of instruments disturbingthe patients. The features of the designed system will be verified experimentally on a new generation of infusion pumps with remote control management and with centralized acquisition and storage of information about the medical treatment and about thebasic life functions of patients. The realized applied research will speed up the further development of a new generation of medical apparatus, which will then be integrated as part of a remote-access medical information system. data communication; wire-less network; infusion pump
Digital archives of Czech archeology The aim of the project is to contribute to the development of a complex information system of archaeological data within the Institute of Archeology, Prague. Digitalisation of substantial parts of the primary documentation of archaeological field research (both of some old excavations and the current ones) is planned as well as its interconnection with a geographical information system and bibliographical data. The significance of these efforts may be seen in (a) the rescue of some extremely important documents which have been seriously damaged by the flood in 2002; (b) protection of other documents against any other future danger; (c) the development of appropriate methods of digital data acquisition, storage and use for various research goals; (d) the establishement of an information system on the intranet of the Institute, with the short-term perspective of its transformation into a internet solution. excavation records; rescue of damaged data; digital archives; intranet; geographic information system; spatial analysis	Digital archives of Czech archeology The aim of the project is to contribute to the development of a complex information system of archaeological data within the Institute of Archeology, Prague. Digitalisation of substantial parts of the primary documentation of archaeological field research (both of some old excavations and the current ones) is planned as well as its interconnection with a geographical information system and bibliographical data. The significance of these efforts may be seen in (a) the rescue of some extremely important documents which have been seriously damaged by the flood in 2002; (b) protection of other documents against any other future danger; (c) the development of appropriate methods of digital data acquisition, storage and use for various research goals; (d) the establishement of an information system on the intranet of the Institute, with the short-term perspective of its transformation into a internet solution. excavation records; rescue of damaged data; digital archives; intranet; geographic information system; spatial analysis
DML-CZ: Czech Digital Mathematical Library The aim of the project is to study, develop and apply processes, methods and tools enabling to create an infrastructure and conditions for implementation of the Czech Mathematical Digital Library which will comprise a relevant part of the mathematical literature published in the Czech Republic and for its integration into the World Mathematical Digital Library (WDML). The project includes the beginning of the digitization process, provision of the end users with an access to the digital stuff, investigation of advanced technologies for search in mathematical documents and integration of born-digital documents. The project comprises the design and realization of solutions to mutually connected problem circles in five domains: acquision of the stuff to be digitized and securing the IPR, digitization and provision of metadata, creation of structured digital documents, generation of the digital library with a long term archiving, integration of the digital library into the WDML. digital library; mathematics; digitization; metadata; OCR; database; archiving digital objects; full-text search; datamining; persistent global identification of digital objects; Zentralblatt MATH; MathSciNet	DML-CZ: Czech Digital Mathematical Library The aim of the project is to study, develop and apply processes, methods and tools enabling to create an infrastructure and conditions for implementation of the Czech Mathematical Digital Library which will comprise a relevant part of the mathematical literature published in the Czech Republic and for its integration into the World Mathematical Digital Library (WDML). The project includes the beginning of the digitization process, provision of the end users with an access to the digital stuff, investigation of advanced technologies for search in mathematical documents and integration of born-digital documents. The project comprises the design and realization of solutions to mutually connected problem circles in five domains: acquision of the stuff to be digitized and securing the IPR, digitization and provision of metadata, creation of structured digital documents, generation of the digital library with a long term archiving, integration of the digital library into the WDML. digital library; mathematics; digitization; metadata; OCR; database; archiving digital objects; full-text search; datamining; persistent global identification of digital objects; Zentralblatt MATH; MathSciNet
Information technologies for development of continuous shared health care The project will deal with the development of methods and technologies providing continuity of health care in information society. It will be based on the development of methods and techniques of remote access to information in the form of data and knowledge in connection to electronic health documentation. In the framework of the project methods and techniques supporting creation of a unified system of electronic documentation for the field of healthcare with utilization of a personal identifying chip-cards will be developed. It is very important for an applied research that its results could be verified in cooperation with physicians, from the healthcare experience point of view. Therefore some methods and technological solutions in the framework ofthe applied research will be verified in selected healthcare institutions, e.g. General University Hospital, Municipal Hospital in Caslav, Rescue Service in Caslav and selected outdoor departments of Caslav region and Prague. information society; healthcare; telemedicine; electronic health record; digital signature; personal data protection; access management; chip-cards/smartcards; biomedical informatics; health informatics	Information technologies for development of continuous shared health care The project will deal with the development of methods and technologies providing continuity of health care in information society. It will be based on the development of methods and techniques of remote access to information in the form of data and knowledge in connection to electronic health documentation. In the framework of the project methods and techniques supporting creation of a unified system of electronic documentation for the field of healthcare with utilization of a personal identifying chip-cards will be developed. It is very important for an applied research that its results could be verified in cooperation with physicians, from the healthcare experience point of view. Therefore some methods and technological solutions in the framework ofthe applied research will be verified in selected healthcare institutions, e.g. General University Hospital, Municipal Hospital in Caslav, Rescue Service in Caslav and selected outdoor departments of Caslav region and Prague. information society; healthcare; telemedicine; electronic health record; digital signature; personal data protection; access management; chip-cards/smartcards; biomedical informatics; health informatics
Interactive information portal for algorithmic mathematics An internet portal (gate) will be established containing expositions with study material covering various parts of algorithmic mathematics intertwined with instantaneous possibility to exploit the full computational power of computer algebra system package Mathematica for computations on various levels (of auxiliary, demo, cheking etc. character) . The internet access will open the possibility to use the computational potential of pre-programmed codes to all individuals not only those having a valid Mathematica licence. The web site will be completely maintanced by Mathematica components. algorithmic mathematics; algorithmic informatics; cryptography; e-learning	Interactive information portal for algorithmic mathematics An internet portal (gate) will be established containing expositions with study material covering various parts of algorithmic mathematics intertwined with instantaneous possibility to exploit the full computational power of computer algebra system package Mathematica for computations on various levels (of auxiliary, demo, cheking etc. character) . The internet access will open the possibility to use the computational potential of pre-programmed codes to all individuals not only those having a valid Mathematica licence. The web site will be completely maintanced by Mathematica components. algorithmic mathematics; algorithmic informatics; cryptography; e-learning
Internet Language Consulting Service The aim of the project is to develop the first electronic manual of Czech language in such a way that all advices and recommendations provided by Internet Language Consulting Service at the Institute of Czech Language (Czech Academy of Sciences) can be delivered primarily through a web interface. The manual will contain extensive and versatile information about Czech language stored in a database. That will allow users to search for necessary answers comfortably and in a short time.The language data will be collected by linguists and in cooperation with language engineers the appropriate searching software will be implemented. Such manual will display a number of advantages: it will serve on-line to all users, it will be open to further modifications in accordance with the development of Czech language and needs of the users. Last but not least - it will make the advisory activities more efficient. Czech National Corpus; electronic manual; web interface; language data; language database; language information; language norms; users of Czech; searching and browsing software; Internet Language Consulting Service	Internet Language Consulting Service The aim of the project is to develop the first electronic manual of Czech language in such a way that all advices and recommendations provided by Internet Language Consulting Service at the Institute of Czech Language (Czech Academy of Sciences) can be delivered primarily through a web interface. The manual will contain extensive and versatile information about Czech language stored in a database. That will allow users to search for necessary answers comfortably and in a short time.The language data will be collected by linguists and in cooperation with language engineers the appropriate searching software will be implemented. Such manual will display a number of advantages: it will serve on-line to all users, it will be open to further modifications in accordance with the development of Czech language and needs of the users. Last but not least - it will make the advisory activities more efficient. Czech National Corpus; electronic manual; web interface; language data; language database; language information; language norms; users of Czech; searching and browsing software; Internet Language Consulting Service
Digital Library of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic The aim of the project is to study, develop and apply processes, methods and tools enabling to create an infrastructure and conditions for realization ot the Digital Library of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic. The project includes the beginning of the digitization process, provision of the end users with an access to the digital stuff, investigation of advanced technologies for search in scientific documents and integration of born-digital documents.The project comprises the design and realization of solution, acquision of the stuff to be digitized and securing the IPR, digitization and provision of metadata, creation of structured digital documents and generation of the digital library with a long term archiving. digital library; digital archive; scanning; metadata; graphic conversion of digital objects; OCR; scientific informations; digital objects; data searching; information searching; full-text searching; advanced searching; OAI-PMH; Z 39.50	Digital Library of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic The aim of the project is to study, develop and apply processes, methods and tools enabling to create an infrastructure and conditions for realization ot the Digital Library of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic. The project includes the beginning of the digitization process, provision of the end users with an access to the digital stuff, investigation of advanced technologies for search in scientific documents and integration of born-digital documents.The project comprises the design and realization of solution, acquision of the stuff to be digitized and securing the IPR, digitization and provision of metadata, creation of structured digital documents and generation of the digital library with a long term archiving. digital library; digital archive; scanning; metadata; graphic conversion of digital objects; OCR; scientific informations; digital objects; data searching; information searching; full-text searching; advanced searching; OAI-PMH; Z 39.50
From a Natural Language to Knowledge and the Semantic Web The project "From a Natural Language to Knowledge and the Semantic Web" focuses on the interlinking linguistic and content analysis (and synthesis). It is based on deep syntax analysis as captured in the Prague Dependency Treebank. The project objectiveis to design and implement such representation of knowledge contained in common text that can formally and logically capture the content of a message in natural language. Natural demand for this knowledge representation is language independence. Unavoidable language-dependent phenomena will be exactly determined, language relations defined, and conversions between representations of the same knowledge in different languages will be implemented. The Project will be focused at least on two languages (Czech and English). A sufficient amount of linguistically annotated data necessary for machine learning methods will be also prepared. Project results will be utilizable for information extraction as well as for automatic machine translation. natural language processing; knowledge representation; formal and lexical semantics; information extraction; computational linguistics; language corpora	From a Natural Language to Knowledge and the Semantic Web The project "From a Natural Language to Knowledge and the Semantic Web" focuses on the interlinking linguistic and content analysis (and synthesis). It is based on deep syntax analysis as captured in the Prague Dependency Treebank. The project objectiveis to design and implement such representation of knowledge contained in common text that can formally and logically capture the content of a message in natural language. Natural demand for this knowledge representation is language independence. Unavoidable language-dependent phenomena will be exactly determined, language relations defined, and conversions between representations of the same knowledge in different languages will be implemented. The Project will be focused at least on two languages (Czech and English). A sufficient amount of linguistically annotated data necessary for machine learning methods will be also prepared. Project results will be utilizable for information extraction as well as for automatic machine translation. natural language processing; knowledge representation; formal and lexical semantics; information extraction; computational linguistics; language corpora
Voice technologies in information systems The aim of the project is to work out the necessary infrastructure for the speech processing and for the processing of information which is spoken or written by human communicator. Also multimedial information will be taken into account.The infrastructure is composed by the large system of software tools (eg. programs for database annotations, programs for real time speech recognition, progarms for data transfer, and data organisation or batch-spooling systems used in huge computational tasks solved inbig computer clusters), and know-how from the field of computer architecture. The common feature of theese topics is the distribution of tasks in Grid nets - in our case: the distribution of data during the speech recogniser training as well as in speechrecogniser applications, but also in many associated operations. voice information; speech processing; speech recognition; multimedia	Voice technologies in information systems The aim of the project is to work out the necessary infrastructure for the speech processing and for the processing of information which is spoken or written by human communicator. Also multimedial information will be taken into account.The infrastructure is composed by the large system of software tools (eg. programs for database annotations, programs for real time speech recognition, progarms for data transfer, and data organisation or batch-spooling systems used in huge computational tasks solved inbig computer clusters), and know-how from the field of computer architecture. The common feature of theese topics is the distribution of tasks in Grid nets - in our case: the distribution of data during the speech recogniser training as well as in speechrecogniser applications, but also in many associated operations. voice information; speech processing; speech recognition; multimedia
Knowledge-based support of diagnostics and prediction in cardiology In this project, a set of theoretically well developed methods and algorithms for knowledge-based support of diagnostics and prediction in cardiology based on agent technology will be designed and developed. Developed methods will be implemented. Implemented system will allow analyze data from multi-electrode records of surface ECG, solve inverse problem, integrate results of further methods and suggest diagnosis on their basis. A database of interpreted data will be developed. The proposed project is to support especially interconnection of basic research in the area of artificial intelligence with application of developed methods to medicine. Real world task provides platform for verification of both functionality of proposed methods and the medicalapplication itself. The project results will be directly applicable at the Internal Clinics of the co-holder as well as at similar departments in other hospitals. knowledge-based system; electrocardiography; intelligent methods; diagnostics; prediction; agent technology	Knowledge-based support of diagnostics and prediction in cardiology In this project, a set of theoretically well developed methods and algorithms for knowledge-based support of diagnostics and prediction in cardiology based on agent technology will be designed and developed. Developed methods will be implemented. Implemented system will allow analyze data from multi-electrode records of surface ECG, solve inverse problem, integrate results of further methods and suggest diagnosis on their basis. A database of interpreted data will be developed. The proposed project is to support especially interconnection of basic research in the area of artificial intelligence with application of developed methods to medicine. Real world task provides platform for verification of both functionality of proposed methods and the medicalapplication itself. The project results will be directly applicable at the Internal Clinics of the co-holder as well as at similar departments in other hospitals. knowledge-based system; electrocardiography; intelligent methods; diagnostics; prediction; agent technology
Information and communication system for creation and control of virtual enterprises The main aim of this project is support of mutual cooperation of enterprises in order to identify appropriate enterprises for creation of a new cluster and for effective control of existing clusters. The main topic will be creation of methodology and software that will be used as acceptable implement for cluster creation and cluster control. From the technical point of view above all we will talk about creation of methodical process, definition of acceptable criteria for suitability identification and contribuiton of a new enterprise accession into industrial cluster and about definition of necessary information and criteria for benchmarking of integrated enterprises in cluster. In this solution will be used basics of best practices and principles known from particular areas. Based on our experiences of the cluster area there will be developed new or modified principles and methodologies apllicable in area of cluster management. virtual enterprise; cluster; communication system; information; information management; knowledge management; best practices; cooperation; e-business; e-communication; e-learning; remote accesses; virtual teams; virtual orders	Information and communication system for creation and control of virtual enterprises The main aim of this project is support of mutual cooperation of enterprises in order to identify appropriate enterprises for creation of a new cluster and for effective control of existing clusters. The main topic will be creation of methodology and software that will be used as acceptable implement for cluster creation and cluster control. From the technical point of view above all we will talk about creation of methodical process, definition of acceptable criteria for suitability identification and contribuiton of a new enterprise accession into industrial cluster and about definition of necessary information and criteria for benchmarking of integrated enterprises in cluster. In this solution will be used basics of best practices and principles known from particular areas. Based on our experiences of the cluster area there will be developed new or modified principles and methodologies apllicable in area of cluster management. virtual enterprise; cluster; communication system; information; information management; knowledge management; best practices; cooperation; e-business; e-communication; e-learning; remote accesses; virtual teams; virtual orders
MediGrid - methods and tools for GRID application in biomedicine The aim of the project is to design, develop and test-implement the MediGrid - an environment and indexed modular system of applications designed for distributed processing of data and computational tasks in the application domain of health (both in research and in practice). The system will be based on the Grid network, which will provide mechanisms of insertion and publication of specialized modules for data sharing (including real-time data sharing and teleconsultation modules), data collection and analysis. The system will include the biomedical ontology module, which will provide access to the modules and their cooperation. telemedicine; computer networks; GRID; health informatics; medical ontology; knowledge base; teleconference; e-Health	MediGrid - methods and tools for GRID application in biomedicine The aim of the project is to design, develop and test-implement the MediGrid - an environment and indexed modular system of applications designed for distributed processing of data and computational tasks in the application domain of health (both in research and in practice). The system will be based on the Grid network, which will provide mechanisms of insertion and publication of specialized modules for data sharing (including real-time data sharing and teleconsultation modules), data collection and analysis. The system will include the biomedical ontology module, which will provide access to the modules and their cooperation. telemedicine; computer networks; GRID; health informatics; medical ontology; knowledge base; teleconference; e-Health
Management of geografic information and knowledge The project solves repository and distribution of extent data files of type of cadaster of real estates, state map 1:5000, ZABAGED etc. on the base of situation in Europe and the Czech Republic. International standards are used for the solution and technological requirements are defined. Proposal for use in the praxes and benefits for the Czech Republic are very important part of the solution. Part of the project is also description of main partial tasks and schema of data providing. web services; data repository; OGC standards; cadaster of real estates; geographical data; data security; data access; marketing; web-technologies	Management of geografic information and knowledge The project solves repository and distribution of extent data files of type of cadaster of real estates, state map 1:5000, ZABAGED etc. on the base of situation in Europe and the Czech Republic. International standards are used for the solution and technological requirements are defined. Proposal for use in the praxes and benefits for the Czech Republic are very important part of the solution. Part of the project is also description of main partial tasks and schema of data providing. web services; data repository; OGC standards; cadaster of real estates; geographical data; data security; data access; marketing; web-technologies
Documentation data transfer system for update of civil service information system for land surveying and cadaster The object of the solution is to create documentation data exchange format by the international standards for update of state information system for cadaster of real estates and to validate advantages of new exchange format for graphical and descriptivedata in civil service experiences. Part of the solution is also metadata transfer. The solution supposes also creation of application tool for graphical data conversion to the exchange format and testing of data transfer using the Internet network. land surveying; Civil service; web applications; data exchange formats; GML; XML; survey sketches	Documentation data transfer system for update of civil service information system for land surveying and cadaster The object of the solution is to create documentation data exchange format by the international standards for update of state information system for cadaster of real estates and to validate advantages of new exchange format for graphical and descriptivedata in civil service experiences. Part of the solution is also metadata transfer. The solution supposes also creation of application tool for graphical data conversion to the exchange format and testing of data transfer using the Internet network. land surveying; Civil service; web applications; data exchange formats; GML; XML; survey sketches
E-learning in the semantic Web Context The main goal of the proposed project is to develop methodologies and technical means for supporting electronically aided education using Semantic Web, with focus on integration of natural language processing (NLP) methods, adaptive and personalized systems. Priorities of the first phase include integration of legacy NLP applications: seacrh engines with morphology, Wordnet automated document classification and similarity estimation, extraction of kyewords, indexes, abstracts, finding related materialsin digital libraries, infosources and on the web. Research in storing, indexing and querying over heavily interlinked document systems, their adaptivity and personalization will follow. In the next phase, the project will study techniques for data miningon test results data and/or automated feedback construction, possibly including error corpus. The tools developed during the project will be published in open-source and/or offered as web-service. e-learning; semantic web; natural language processing; personalized systems; adaptive systems; assistive technologies	E-learning in the semantic Web Context The main goal of the proposed project is to develop methodologies and technical means for supporting electronically aided education using Semantic Web, with focus on integration of natural language processing (NLP) methods, adaptive and personalized systems. Priorities of the first phase include integration of legacy NLP applications: seacrh engines with morphology, Wordnet automated document classification and similarity estimation, extraction of kyewords, indexes, abstracts, finding related materialsin digital libraries, infosources and on the web. Research in storing, indexing and querying over heavily interlinked document systems, their adaptivity and personalization will follow. In the next phase, the project will study techniques for data miningon test results data and/or automated feedback construction, possibly including error corpus. The tools developed during the project will be published in open-source and/or offered as web-service. e-learning; semantic web; natural language processing; personalized systems; adaptive systems; assistive technologies
Implementation and validation of robust knowledge management and analytical system UIRON for oncology The project goal is to develop an intelligent system, which will play role of librarian assistant in the area of medical data, specialised on oncology. This assistant will be able to be trained in work with historical data from miscellaneous phases of oncological research and with regard to structure and rule differences in these phases. This project includes research and development of presentation techniques of huge collection data with emphasis to intuitiveness and global overview using "Level of Detail" principle. These are key properties for medical practice usability. In the scope of the project an unique combination of data mining area results together with knowledge processing methods in the artificial intelligence field will be tested. These abilities will allow to support modern research area of diagnostic technologies, such as genome expression mapping of tumours (microarrays). artificial intelligence; knowledge systems; data mining; medical information; oncological registry; huge data collection presentation; analysis; intuitive searching; conceptual query language	Implementation and validation of robust knowledge management and analytical system UIRON for oncology The project goal is to develop an intelligent system, which will play role of librarian assistant in the area of medical data, specialised on oncology. This assistant will be able to be trained in work with historical data from miscellaneous phases of oncological research and with regard to structure and rule differences in these phases. This project includes research and development of presentation techniques of huge collection data with emphasis to intuitiveness and global overview using "Level of Detail" principle. These are key properties for medical practice usability. In the scope of the project an unique combination of data mining area results together with knowledge processing methods in the artificial intelligence field will be tested. These abilities will allow to support modern research area of diagnostic technologies, such as genome expression mapping of tumours (microarrays). artificial intelligence; knowledge systems; data mining; medical information; oncological registry; huge data collection presentation; analysis; intuitive searching; conceptual query language
Processes research of gaining, transmission, storing and exploitation of electronic resources, unifite system of government sources documentation Project concetrates on processes research of gaining, transmission, storing and exploitation of electronic sources and unifite system of government sources documentation. Proposed project solution will anable compatibility with standard of information sources of the project "Government portal". It will provide kompatability of the project with government sources repository with other public sector repositories. The significant aim of the projest is kooperation with information sources repository of theCzech statitical office (CSU) and including project results in the planed process of integration of the CSU repository into central government sources repository of the Government portal project. The main project benefit will be the immidiet prime data sources accessibility in Czech through Government portal and CSU portal. Exploitation of project results in dvelopment of repositories of "Government portal" ans CSU portal will provide project resultst to 350-450 users monthly. electronic sources; information repository; information sources; DCMES; KIZVS; UDDI; XML; IDA	Processes research of gaining, transmission, storing and exploitation of electronic resources, unifite system of government sources documentation Project concetrates on processes research of gaining, transmission, storing and exploitation of electronic sources and unifite system of government sources documentation. Proposed project solution will anable compatibility with standard of information sources of the project "Government portal". It will provide kompatability of the project with government sources repository with other public sector repositories. The significant aim of the projest is kooperation with information sources repository of theCzech statitical office (CSU) and including project results in the planed process of integration of the CSU repository into central government sources repository of the Government portal project. The main project benefit will be the immidiet prime data sources accessibility in Czech through Government portal and CSU portal. Exploitation of project results in dvelopment of repositories of "Government portal" ans CSU portal will provide project resultst to 350-450 users monthly. electronic sources; information repository; information sources; DCMES; KIZVS; UDDI; XML; IDA
Effective processing of medical image information Today most hospitals use PACS systems locally to store and evaluate video data produced by various modalities (i.e. x-ray, ultrasound, computer tomography, etc.). In terms of MeDiMed project we have built a metropolitan PACS archive opened to all hospitals interested in either storing its medicine picture data in this archive or interchanging these data with another hospitals. Now after years of operating this PACS archive we are intended to make substantial step forward. Healthcare is an area where practice, education and research are mutually interconnected and Masaryk University can serve as "opened neutral trustworthy institution". The technological objective is to support the compatibility and interoperability of medical equipments and of value added services to be provided by all participants. In the legislative area it is necessary to work on the (gradual) unification of legal standards of all EU countries so it is possible to process medical image data in the required way. PACS; DICOM; telemedicine; legislature; education; research	Effective processing of medical image information Today most hospitals use PACS systems locally to store and evaluate video data produced by various modalities (i.e. x-ray, ultrasound, computer tomography, etc.). In terms of MeDiMed project we have built a metropolitan PACS archive opened to all hospitals interested in either storing its medicine picture data in this archive or interchanging these data with another hospitals. Now after years of operating this PACS archive we are intended to make substantial step forward. Healthcare is an area where practice, education and research are mutually interconnected and Masaryk University can serve as "opened neutral trustworthy institution". The technological objective is to support the compatibility and interoperability of medical equipments and of value added services to be provided by all participants. In the legislative area it is necessary to work on the (gradual) unification of legal standards of all EU countries so it is possible to process medical image data in the required way. PACS; DICOM; telemedicine; legislature; education; research
The registration system of museum collections The "ESMUS - The registration system of museum collections" project is based on a development of the theoretical apparatus for a registration of massive museum collections on IT resources in Czech Republic. Research and development will be focused on SQLdatabases. As the basic output there will be theoretical models: data-based and function-based. The apparatus will be respect a massive number of records, hidden differences between legal and professional requirements; multimedial data; inconsistency ofrecord data structures of the particular collections; multilanguages data. It will also be applicable for less massive collections. A validity of the developed apparatus will be verified by its application under real conditions for a registration of theNational Museum collections. The proposed project will bring a benefit for society as the National Museum viewed from the point of the "Informational Society" program is regrettably neglected institution. the registration system of massive museum collections; SQL databases; the registration of the National museum collections	The registration system of museum collections The "ESMUS - The registration system of museum collections" project is based on a development of the theoretical apparatus for a registration of massive museum collections on IT resources in Czech Republic. Research and development will be focused on SQLdatabases. As the basic output there will be theoretical models: data-based and function-based. The apparatus will be respect a massive number of records, hidden differences between legal and professional requirements; multimedial data; inconsistency ofrecord data structures of the particular collections; multilanguages data. It will also be applicable for less massive collections. A validity of the developed apparatus will be verified by its application under real conditions for a registration of theNational Museum collections. The proposed project will bring a benefit for society as the National Museum viewed from the point of the "Informational Society" program is regrettably neglected institution. the registration system of massive museum collections; SQL databases; the registration of the National museum collections
Knowledge Base for Searching and Development of Synergic Business Clusters Clusters (synergic cooperation of small and medium enterprises and various institutions) is a proven way to encrease national economy competitivness (see Czechinvest initiatives). The project goal is development od a metodology for systematic evalation of information about companies (their product lines and economical links) and the market (demand and offer trends, opportunities and risks) based on which could be possible to identify effectively oranisations qualified to create a cluster (facilitator role) and which could help to already created cluster to make qualified decissions for further development (Competitive Intelligence role). The project will result in a prototypal consulting site based on leading edge technologies for information search and analyses connected to identified relevant information sources where will be created knowledge base and cognitive base for cluster creation in a selected area based on market opportunities analsyses (EU). Knowledge base; National Economy; Competitivness; SME; synergy; Competitive Intelligence; clusters	Knowledge Base for Searching and Development of Synergic Business Clusters Clusters (synergic cooperation of small and medium enterprises and various institutions) is a proven way to encrease national economy competitivness (see Czechinvest initiatives). The project goal is development od a metodology for systematic evalation of information about companies (their product lines and economical links) and the market (demand and offer trends, opportunities and risks) based on which could be possible to identify effectively oranisations qualified to create a cluster (facilitator role) and which could help to already created cluster to make qualified decissions for further development (Competitive Intelligence role). The project will result in a prototypal consulting site based on leading edge technologies for information search and analyses connected to identified relevant information sources where will be created knowledge base and cognitive base for cluster creation in a selected area based on market opportunities analsyses (EU). Knowledge base; National Economy; Competitivness; SME; synergy; Competitive Intelligence; clusters
Developing of matematerials and rezonant structures for communication technologie in the terahertz range The current project aims to investigate metamaterials acting as tunable frequency filters or switches working at extremely high frequencies (hundreds of GHz to units of THz). Such quasioptical devices will be created by inserting defects into a periodicarrangement of dielectric materials exhibiting a forbidden band of photon energies. It is necessary to choose defects with optical properties depending on an external parameters; this leads to tunability of the pass band which is important for expected applications. This kind of structures will be designed, studied theoretically by means of a computer model, set up and studied experimentally by means of time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy with phase sensitivity. The project is expected to contribute tothe development of information and communication technologies in the region of tenths to tens of THz. tunable filter; switch; narrow-bandpass filter; optical metamaterials; terahertz; ferroelectric materials	Developing of matematerials and rezonant structures for communication technologie in the terahertz range The current project aims to investigate metamaterials acting as tunable frequency filters or switches working at extremely high frequencies (hundreds of GHz to units of THz). Such quasioptical devices will be created by inserting defects into a periodicarrangement of dielectric materials exhibiting a forbidden band of photon energies. It is necessary to choose defects with optical properties depending on an external parameters; this leads to tunability of the pass band which is important for expected applications. This kind of structures will be designed, studied theoretically by means of a computer model, set up and studied experimentally by means of time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy with phase sensitivity. The project is expected to contribute tothe development of information and communication technologies in the region of tenths to tens of THz. tunable filter; switch; narrow-bandpass filter; optical metamaterials; terahertz; ferroelectric materials
Application of quantum informatics on PKI (Public Key Infrastructure) The project concerns on the application of the results in quantum informatics for the practical application in the classical cryptology and PKI from the point ov view of the information security the first of all: a) the realization of the authentizationvia enanglement including quantum information protocols, b) in the consequence with the PKI, digital signature and certification authorities including quantum dig. signature and the problematics of archivation from the point of view of future existence of quantum computing, c) research in quantum informatics from the new physical aspects from the point of application for communication and classical informatics, d) the research in the domain of the application of quantum game theory for cryptology. PKI; quantum digital signature; quantum informatics; quantum computing; quantum cryptology; quantum game theory	Application of quantum informatics on PKI (Public Key Infrastructure) The project concerns on the application of the results in quantum informatics for the practical application in the classical cryptology and PKI from the point ov view of the information security the first of all: a) the realization of the authentizationvia enanglement including quantum information protocols, b) in the consequence with the PKI, digital signature and certification authorities including quantum dig. signature and the problematics of archivation from the point of view of future existence of quantum computing, c) research in quantum informatics from the new physical aspects from the point of application for communication and classical informatics, d) the research in the domain of the application of quantum game theory for cryptology. PKI; quantum digital signature; quantum informatics; quantum computing; quantum cryptology; quantum game theory
Components for high transmission rate all-optical networks We believe that future development of optical networks will be towards the all-optical networks with packet switching. Optical networks will provide continuous optical path using optical crossconnects, optical add-drop multiplexers together with regeneration of optical pulses in 2R- and 3R-regenerators. Our project aims theoretical study and experimental realization of components suitable for these high transmission rate optical networks. The main building block of majority of these network elements isan optical gate. We intend to use interferometric configuration with semiconductor optical amplifier in gain-transparent regime. Using this technique we will be able to achieve large optical bandwidth and switch simultaneously several spectral channels as occurs in optical spectral bus and WDM systems. We will study optical demultiplexor, 3R regenerator, optical recovery unit, and optical memory and its use in measurement aplications. add-drop multipexer; optical switching; optical regeneration; cross-gain modulation; cross phase modulation; four wave mixing; optical memory	Components for high transmission rate all-optical networks We believe that future development of optical networks will be towards the all-optical networks with packet switching. Optical networks will provide continuous optical path using optical crossconnects, optical add-drop multiplexers together with regeneration of optical pulses in 2R- and 3R-regenerators. Our project aims theoretical study and experimental realization of components suitable for these high transmission rate optical networks. The main building block of majority of these network elements isan optical gate. We intend to use interferometric configuration with semiconductor optical amplifier in gain-transparent regime. Using this technique we will be able to achieve large optical bandwidth and switch simultaneously several spectral channels as occurs in optical spectral bus and WDM systems. We will study optical demultiplexor, 3R regenerator, optical recovery unit, and optical memory and its use in measurement aplications. add-drop multipexer; optical switching; optical regeneration; cross-gain modulation; cross phase modulation; four wave mixing; optical memory
Raman fibre amplifiers with time-division multiplexed pumping The aim of the project is to develop a numerical model of time division-multiplex (TDM) pumped Raman fibre amplifier a to perform detailed large-signal analysis of the advantages of TDM pumping with respect to convetional continuous wave (CW) pumping ofRaman fibre amplifiers. The numerical model will be used for parameter optimization of wide-band Raman fibre amplifier with flat optical signal-to-noise (OSNR) ratio over the whole band of amplification. On the basis of the theoretical results a sample TDM pumped Raman fibre amplifier will be realised and and its parameters experimetally investigated and compared with CW pumped Raman fibre amplifier. The properties of the sample TDM pumped Raman amplifier will be verified in the optical link Prague-Brnoof the CzechLight experimental network of the Czech national research and educational network of the CESNET for the transmission of wavelength division multiplexed 10 Gbit/s channels. optical communications; fibre optical amplifiers; Raman amplifiers; wavelength division multiplexin; time division multiplexing	Raman fibre amplifiers with time-division multiplexed pumping The aim of the project is to develop a numerical model of time division-multiplex (TDM) pumped Raman fibre amplifier a to perform detailed large-signal analysis of the advantages of TDM pumping with respect to convetional continuous wave (CW) pumping ofRaman fibre amplifiers. The numerical model will be used for parameter optimization of wide-band Raman fibre amplifier with flat optical signal-to-noise (OSNR) ratio over the whole band of amplification. On the basis of the theoretical results a sample TDM pumped Raman fibre amplifier will be realised and and its parameters experimetally investigated and compared with CW pumped Raman fibre amplifier. The properties of the sample TDM pumped Raman amplifier will be verified in the optical link Prague-Brnoof the CzechLight experimental network of the Czech national research and educational network of the CESNET for the transmission of wavelength division multiplexed 10 Gbit/s channels. optical communications; fibre optical amplifiers; Raman amplifiers; wavelength division multiplexin; time division multiplexing
Specification of quantitative criteria and optimalization of resources for broadband access networks The goal of the project is to contribute to the development of the broadband access networks in the public domain. It is focused on two related areas: a) specification of qualitative criteria for typical services of broadband access network and optimization of this network to guarantee these services b) optimization methods for filter design and research of adaptive equalization algorithms used in the digital subscriber line. The first of the two tasks will be solved using analysis and modelling of thetraffic character for different types of services and their combinations and by simulating the network traffic under various conditions. The analytical design methods for the broadband digital filters will be optimized and their implementation will be considered. In the field of adaptive equalizers, the project is focused on the advanced deconvolution methods, which are, due to their computational complexity, still seldom used in the industry. signal processing; communication; xDSL; equalization; multi-carrier modulation; real-time processing; quality of services	Specification of quantitative criteria and optimalization of resources for broadband access networks The goal of the project is to contribute to the development of the broadband access networks in the public domain. It is focused on two related areas: a) specification of qualitative criteria for typical services of broadband access network and optimization of this network to guarantee these services b) optimization methods for filter design and research of adaptive equalization algorithms used in the digital subscriber line. The first of the two tasks will be solved using analysis and modelling of thetraffic character for different types of services and their combinations and by simulating the network traffic under various conditions. The analytical design methods for the broadband digital filters will be optimized and their implementation will be considered. In the field of adaptive equalizers, the project is focused on the advanced deconvolution methods, which are, due to their computational complexity, still seldom used in the industry. signal processing; communication; xDSL; equalization; multi-carrier modulation; real-time processing; quality of services
Optimization of methods for IP multicast networks Currently, communication via IP networks is being expanded by new services of broadcasting (television, radio). Launching these services is difficult due to the unprepared communication methods used. According to present-day assumptions, the specific source multicast (SSM) will be used for that purpose. However, SSM does not generally provide the signalling feedback channel. In view of the thousands of receivers (digital television), this property is awfully harmful to the network. The aim of the project is to optimize IP network usage by applying new communication algorithms. Formal models of the communication system will be proposed. The outcomes will be analyzed using computer simulation for an extreme number of receivers. The analysis will cover conditions that are expected to be real in the near future. Consequently, the efficiency of new algorithms will be examined in an experimental network and in real conditions. IP network; multicast; protocol; optimalization; routing; distribution; digital television	Optimization of methods for IP multicast networks Currently, communication via IP networks is being expanded by new services of broadcasting (television, radio). Launching these services is difficult due to the unprepared communication methods used. According to present-day assumptions, the specific source multicast (SSM) will be used for that purpose. However, SSM does not generally provide the signalling feedback channel. In view of the thousands of receivers (digital television), this property is awfully harmful to the network. The aim of the project is to optimize IP network usage by applying new communication algorithms. Formal models of the communication system will be proposed. The outcomes will be analyzed using computer simulation for an extreme number of receivers. The analysis will cover conditions that are expected to be real in the near future. Consequently, the efficiency of new algorithms will be examined in an experimental network and in real conditions. IP network; multicast; protocol; optimalization; routing; distribution; digital television
Sophisticated noise and defect suppression devices in speech communication and transmission for new generation mobile and cable networks In mobile and solid telecommunication and computer networks there is a need to solve the basic problem concerning the separation of speech signal from undesirable noise. The aim of the project is to develop a technique for recognizing the type of noise in speech signal transmitted through the transmission channel, its evaluation, and application of a sophicticated method for noise suppresion. The proposed methods will be optimized in order to be suitable for implementation in digital signal processors.Further, it is necessary to ensure automated reconstruction of missing signal segments, caused by either their loss or a huge transmission delay. The final result of the project will be a software solution applicable in real-time environment, independentof the technical realization. There is a wide scope for the utilization of the technology, starting from communication networks (switchboards for GSM etc.), through internet (VoIP), and ending with airline or military communication. one-channel speech enhancement methods; multi-channel speech enhancement methods; automated indentification of noise; digital signal processing; digital signal processors; TTS synthesis	Sophisticated noise and defect suppression devices in speech communication and transmission for new generation mobile and cable networks In mobile and solid telecommunication and computer networks there is a need to solve the basic problem concerning the separation of speech signal from undesirable noise. The aim of the project is to develop a technique for recognizing the type of noise in speech signal transmitted through the transmission channel, its evaluation, and application of a sophicticated method for noise suppresion. The proposed methods will be optimized in order to be suitable for implementation in digital signal processors.Further, it is necessary to ensure automated reconstruction of missing signal segments, caused by either their loss or a huge transmission delay. The final result of the project will be a software solution applicable in real-time environment, independentof the technical realization. There is a wide scope for the utilization of the technology, starting from communication networks (switchboards for GSM etc.), through internet (VoIP), and ending with airline or military communication. one-channel speech enhancement methods; multi-channel speech enhancement methods; automated indentification of noise; digital signal processing; digital signal processors; TTS synthesis
Universal architecture for providing interactive information services in terrestrial digital television The project focuses on basic and applied research in the area of providing interactive information services using terrestrial digital television broadcasting. A universal architecture for providing multimedia content will be investigated. The system should be able to handle user requirements through the return channel. The research work will be in compliance with EU standards for DTV. Within project solution the conception will be verified of a system for publishing and presentation in the field of digital television. A unified administration interface (backend) will be created which will serve for developing content and submitting it for DTV applications. The system will automatically solve recurrent implementation operations, which will cause considerably shorter development cycles of new DTV applications, and thus increase the competitiveness of new products. DTV; digital television; terrestrial; return channel; interactivity; information services; DVB	Universal architecture for providing interactive information services in terrestrial digital television The project focuses on basic and applied research in the area of providing interactive information services using terrestrial digital television broadcasting. A universal architecture for providing multimedia content will be investigated. The system should be able to handle user requirements through the return channel. The research work will be in compliance with EU standards for DTV. Within project solution the conception will be verified of a system for publishing and presentation in the field of digital television. A unified administration interface (backend) will be created which will serve for developing content and submitting it for DTV applications. The system will automatically solve recurrent implementation operations, which will cause considerably shorter development cycles of new DTV applications, and thus increase the competitiveness of new products. DTV; digital television; terrestrial; return channel; interactivity; information services; DVB
Research of interactive systems using digital terresterial television as information channel for Czech Republic citizens HIDT project is targeted towards research, development and final design of Interactive Hybrid Services for Digital Terrestrial Television ( DVB-T), dedicated mainly for interactive access to the Information portal of state information system and for application in Integrated Rescue System of Czech Republic. The main task of proposed project is design of bi-directional interactive chain using DVB-T as down-link and cellular network like up-link or "return chanel". As cellular network the 2,5G GSM systemGPRS is preferred. The goals of the project are as follows: research of existing hardware and software components for design of proposed system, design of complex structure for pilot trial, operation of pilot trial in existing DVB-T and GPRS networks ofCzech Republic, technical documentation for routine operation, patent rights for developed system, dissemination of results in Czech republic and abroad. DVB-T; GPRS; cellular networks; Internet; interactive hybrid system	Research of interactive systems using digital terresterial television as information channel for Czech Republic citizens HIDT project is targeted towards research, development and final design of Interactive Hybrid Services for Digital Terrestrial Television ( DVB-T), dedicated mainly for interactive access to the Information portal of state information system and for application in Integrated Rescue System of Czech Republic. The main task of proposed project is design of bi-directional interactive chain using DVB-T as down-link and cellular network like up-link or "return chanel". As cellular network the 2,5G GSM systemGPRS is preferred. The goals of the project are as follows: research of existing hardware and software components for design of proposed system, design of complex structure for pilot trial, operation of pilot trial in existing DVB-T and GPRS networks ofCzech Republic, technical documentation for routine operation, patent rights for developed system, dissemination of results in Czech republic and abroad. DVB-T; GPRS; cellular networks; Internet; interactive hybrid system
Efficient use of concentrated computing power of PC by creating multiple users workplaces Multicomputers The project aims to research open solutions for efficient use of computing power of standard personal computers. The solutions will be based on free software (free as in "freedom", although usually also costless), in particular GNU/Linux. The research itself will also be open, employing the "bazaar" method - see. S.Raymond's "The Cathedral and the Bazaar" on www.catb.org. The resulting solutions will allow one to connect several sets of keyboard, mouse and monitor to one computer, thus creating severalworkplaces with only one multicomputer". Another possibility is the creation of remote terminals or multiterminals out of cheap computers by connecting them to a powerful server with a standard computer network, either wired or wireless. The project willreuse in part existing components, (X-servers of XFree86 project) which will need to be adapted for the intended purpose. The main part will be based on new technology research. open solutions; efficient use of computing power of PC; ekological solution; free software; thin client; open source; Linux; multicomputer	Efficient use of concentrated computing power of PC by creating multiple users workplaces Multicomputers The project aims to research open solutions for efficient use of computing power of standard personal computers. The solutions will be based on free software (free as in "freedom", although usually also costless), in particular GNU/Linux. The research itself will also be open, employing the "bazaar" method - see. S.Raymond's "The Cathedral and the Bazaar" on www.catb.org. The resulting solutions will allow one to connect several sets of keyboard, mouse and monitor to one computer, thus creating severalworkplaces with only one multicomputer". Another possibility is the creation of remote terminals or multiterminals out of cheap computers by connecting them to a powerful server with a standard computer network, either wired or wireless. The project willreuse in part existing components, (X-servers of XFree86 project) which will need to be adapted for the intended purpose. The main part will be based on new technology research. open solutions; efficient use of computing power of PC; ekological solution; free software; thin client; open source; Linux; multicomputer
Optical 3D-DVD memory media based on new photochromic polymers The main goal of the invention is the development of the 3D multi-layer readable and rewritable memory media (disc) based on the new generation of the photochromic nanomolecular compounds. The development of a new typ of solid state UV laser with buil-infrequency converter and beam splitter will enable two-photon spacial recording, reading and erasing of data on recordable media with several monomolecular layers in 3D mode. This new type of memory will allow to reach bit density up to 1 - 10 Tbit/cm3. DVD optical multilayer rewritable memory discs; 3D spacial two-photon recording; new photochromatic organic compounds; nanomolecules; UV laser with beam splitter and frequency conversion	Optical 3D-DVD memory media based on new photochromic polymers The main goal of the invention is the development of the 3D multi-layer readable and rewritable memory media (disc) based on the new generation of the photochromic nanomolecular compounds. The development of a new typ of solid state UV laser with buil-infrequency converter and beam splitter will enable two-photon spacial recording, reading and erasing of data on recordable media with several monomolecular layers in 3D mode. This new type of memory will allow to reach bit density up to 1 - 10 Tbit/cm3. DVD optical multilayer rewritable memory discs; 3D spacial two-photon recording; new photochromatic organic compounds; nanomolecules; UV laser with beam splitter and frequency conversion
Principles of information processing in neurons and their applications Theoretical and computational approaches will be applied to contribute to better understanding of information processes performed by neurons and neuronal nets. The primary tool will be the theory of stochastic processes and differential equations, supplemented by computer simulations and comparison with experimental findings. Currently most of the computational algorithms used in artificial systems are deterministic to ensure absolute reliability of the computational process. There is an increasing evidence that the computational algorithms used by nervous systems are stochastic, which at the risk of marginal decrease of reliability are far more efficient than the deterministic ones. We will investigate these stochastic principles of information codingin nervous system and on the basis of the achieved results new computational algorithms for man-made devices, like computers or artificial sensors, can be proposed and/or computational processes in living systems influenced. information processing; coding; stochastic processes; algorithm; computational neuroscience	Principles of information processing in neurons and their applications Theoretical and computational approaches will be applied to contribute to better understanding of information processes performed by neurons and neuronal nets. The primary tool will be the theory of stochastic processes and differential equations, supplemented by computer simulations and comparison with experimental findings. Currently most of the computational algorithms used in artificial systems are deterministic to ensure absolute reliability of the computational process. There is an increasing evidence that the computational algorithms used by nervous systems are stochastic, which at the risk of marginal decrease of reliability are far more efficient than the deterministic ones. We will investigate these stochastic principles of information codingin nervous system and on the basis of the achieved results new computational algorithms for man-made devices, like computers or artificial sensors, can be proposed and/or computational processes in living systems influenced. information processing; coding; stochastic processes; algorithm; computational neuroscience
Protein computer modeling and molecular dynamics simulation The main goal of the proposal is to develop the laboratory of the protein structure modelling and of the molecular dynamics simulation equipped with and adequate hardware and software. Such a laboratory has to be flexible enough to reflect growing demands of other laboratories to visualize details of the protein structure and molecular dynamics. The practical goal will be a contribution to understanding of the molecular mechanism of the transport function of Na, K-ATPase, namely determination of amino acid residues involved in the interaction of the H4-H5 loops of Na, K-ATPase in e1 and E2 conformations. To achieve this goal, the model of the enzyme structure in E2 conformation has to bu calculated. Computer modelling is the only way to visualize suchan interaction due to experimation of the H4-H5 loop solely in E1 conformation. Determination of such an interaction is a key point to understand the enzyme function. Molecular mechanism of the enzyme phosphorylation will also be studied. Computer protein modeling; molecular dynamic simulation; protein structure and function relation; Na; K-ATPase; ATP-binding site; ATP-binding; phosphorylation; dynamic fluorescence	Protein computer modeling and molecular dynamics simulation The main goal of the proposal is to develop the laboratory of the protein structure modelling and of the molecular dynamics simulation equipped with and adequate hardware and software. Such a laboratory has to be flexible enough to reflect growing demands of other laboratories to visualize details of the protein structure and molecular dynamics. The practical goal will be a contribution to understanding of the molecular mechanism of the transport function of Na, K-ATPase, namely determination of amino acid residues involved in the interaction of the H4-H5 loops of Na, K-ATPase in e1 and E2 conformations. To achieve this goal, the model of the enzyme structure in E2 conformation has to bu calculated. Computer modelling is the only way to visualize suchan interaction due to experimation of the H4-H5 loop solely in E1 conformation. Determination of such an interaction is a key point to understand the enzyme function. Molecular mechanism of the enzyme phosphorylation will also be studied. Computer protein modeling; molecular dynamic simulation; protein structure and function relation; Na; K-ATPase; ATP-binding site; ATP-binding; phosphorylation; dynamic fluorescence
Mathematical modelling of air quality with applications in management of emergencies The present state of the art of information technologies enables us to simulate and forecast concentrations of atmospheric pollutants and hazardous substances in real time. Besides air quality modelling and forecasting, it is possible to model transportand dispersion of accidentally released pollutants in case of emergencies.The primary aim of the project is to apply modern informatin technologies in the field of air quality modelling and in the management of emergencies. According to the type of problem and applied methodology, the tasks are divided into two workpackages - modelling in regional scale, and modelling in microscale. A secondary task of the project is efficient dissemination of information concerning air quality to general public, and software development for the management of emergencies. The tasks of the project will be solved using modern numerical weather prediction models and chemistry transport models implemented on high performance computing platforms. ollutants; hazardous substances; air quality; mathematical modelling; management of emergencies	Mathematical modelling of air quality with applications in management of emergencies The present state of the art of information technologies enables us to simulate and forecast concentrations of atmospheric pollutants and hazardous substances in real time. Besides air quality modelling and forecasting, it is possible to model transportand dispersion of accidentally released pollutants in case of emergencies.The primary aim of the project is to apply modern informatin technologies in the field of air quality modelling and in the management of emergencies. According to the type of problem and applied methodology, the tasks are divided into two workpackages - modelling in regional scale, and modelling in microscale. A secondary task of the project is efficient dissemination of information concerning air quality to general public, and software development for the management of emergencies. The tasks of the project will be solved using modern numerical weather prediction models and chemistry transport models implemented on high performance computing platforms. ollutants; hazardous substances; air quality; mathematical modelling; management of emergencies
Modelling and simulation of complex technical problems:effective numerical algorithms and parallel implementation using new information technologie The project aims at develpment of methods of computational mathematics and computer science for computer modelling and simulation using parallel computing and optimized computer implementations. The project will result in new (mainly iterative) algorithms of numerical linear algebra characterized by high effectivity, parallel scalability and good robustness. They will be implemented on large distributed and multiprocessor systems, and applied in particular to solution of proglems of a) mechanics of undergroung constructions and assessment of minig technologies as well as problems of biomechanics, b) flow and transport of contaminants in porous rock including chemical reactions, c) metal foming and design of machine components, d) evaluation of reliability of complex systems, e) analysis of scattering of electromagnetic field on periodic structrures. The projekt should at the same time form a team able to solve strategic problems and systematically prepare young researchers. computer modelling and simulation; design; analysis and implementation of algorithms; numerical linear algebra; parallel algorithms; rock mechanics; flow in porous rocks; material forming; reliability of complex systems; biomechanics; design of machines	Modelling and simulation of complex technical problems:effective numerical algorithms and parallel implementation using new information technologie The project aims at develpment of methods of computational mathematics and computer science for computer modelling and simulation using parallel computing and optimized computer implementations. The project will result in new (mainly iterative) algorithms of numerical linear algebra characterized by high effectivity, parallel scalability and good robustness. They will be implemented on large distributed and multiprocessor systems, and applied in particular to solution of proglems of a) mechanics of undergroung constructions and assessment of minig technologies as well as problems of biomechanics, b) flow and transport of contaminants in porous rock including chemical reactions, c) metal foming and design of machine components, d) evaluation of reliability of complex systems, e) analysis of scattering of electromagnetic field on periodic structrures. The projekt should at the same time form a team able to solve strategic problems and systematically prepare young researchers. computer modelling and simulation; design; analysis and implementation of algorithms; numerical linear algebra; parallel algorithms; rock mechanics; flow in porous rocks; material forming; reliability of complex systems; biomechanics; design of machines
Realistic application of formal methods in component systems The project supports component-based application development by combining components with formal behavior description and by designing tools for automated checking of the architecture of applications composed of components with formal behavior description. The project aims to design and implement a functional prototype of a platform for formal verification of component application properties, and to propose and test methods for verification of software components and component applications using this platform. The platform will be open to the emerging methods of formal verification and code analysis, and used to test the suitability and applicability of these methods, especially with respect to model checking. The work on the formal verification methods will focus on identifying approaches to make the existing verification tools more efficient, especially in a distributed environment. formal verification; behavior description; software components; component systems	Realistic application of formal methods in component systems The project supports component-based application development by combining components with formal behavior description and by designing tools for automated checking of the architecture of applications composed of components with formal behavior description. The project aims to design and implement a functional prototype of a platform for formal verification of component application properties, and to propose and test methods for verification of software components and component applications using this platform. The platform will be open to the emerging methods of formal verification and code analysis, and used to test the suitability and applicability of these methods, especially with respect to model checking. The work on the formal verification methods will focus on identifying approaches to make the existing verification tools more efficient, especially in a distributed environment. formal verification; behavior description; software components; component systems
Mathematical modelling of natural gas consumption for small and middle clients The main aim of the proposed project is development of mathematical statistical models for estimation of natural gas consumption for individual consumers whose consumption is not measured on a daily or monthly basis. A further task is modelling and forecasting natural gas consumption for different segments of the gas market and for different regions. The proposed mathematical models and methods will be tested using the gas consumption measurements of selected consumers. These data will be provided by gas distribution companies in the Czech Republic. mathematical statistics; mathematical modelling; prediction; natural gas consumption	Mathematical modelling of natural gas consumption for small and middle clients The main aim of the proposed project is development of mathematical statistical models for estimation of natural gas consumption for individual consumers whose consumption is not measured on a daily or monthly basis. A further task is modelling and forecasting natural gas consumption for different segments of the gas market and for different regions. The proposed mathematical models and methods will be tested using the gas consumption measurements of selected consumers. These data will be provided by gas distribution companies in the Czech Republic. mathematical statistics; mathematical modelling; prediction; natural gas consumption
From a computer controlled spectroscopis experiment to an international database for remote detection of molecules The high-resolution spectroscopy is considered as the crucial information source in the monitoring of the environmental, atmospheric and space research. To support obtaining the unique information on the horizontal and vertical molecular concentration, sophisticated measurements, experiment simulations and theoretical studies in rovibrational spectroscopy are intended. Original experiments and simulations are planned especially in the hyperfine interaction problems to solve questions of determination ofthe atmospheric concentration of the molecules containing nitrogen, chlorine and bromine. The results are aimed to the international database HITRAN and then to industry applications, emission monitoring, astrophysics and especially to the atmospheric research. A deep usage of the informational and computer technologies is desirable in all phases of the proposed research. The planned studies are connected to a number of international projects of the atmospheric research. molecular information database; spectroscopic information; nuclear hyperfine structures; high-resolution molecular spectroscopy; remote sensing of atmospheric molecules; rovibrational spectra; sub-Doppler spectroscopy	From a computer controlled spectroscopis experiment to an international database for remote detection of molecules The high-resolution spectroscopy is considered as the crucial information source in the monitoring of the environmental, atmospheric and space research. To support obtaining the unique information on the horizontal and vertical molecular concentration, sophisticated measurements, experiment simulations and theoretical studies in rovibrational spectroscopy are intended. Original experiments and simulations are planned especially in the hyperfine interaction problems to solve questions of determination ofthe atmospheric concentration of the molecules containing nitrogen, chlorine and bromine. The results are aimed to the international database HITRAN and then to industry applications, emission monitoring, astrophysics and especially to the atmospheric research. A deep usage of the informational and computer technologies is desirable in all phases of the proposed research. The planned studies are connected to a number of international projects of the atmospheric research. molecular information database; spectroscopic information; nuclear hyperfine structures; high-resolution molecular spectroscopy; remote sensing of atmospheric molecules; rovibrational spectra; sub-Doppler spectroscopy
Development of a program environment for mathematic simulations and predictions in catalysis and electrocatalysis Procedures for mathematic simulation and prediction of reactivity of nano-structures of metals and oxides in solid matrices for (electro)catalytic processes will be developed. The base for the design and evaluation of the models will comprise spectroscopic, diffraction and microscopy data characterizing the reactivity on the atomic/molecular level. Combination of the theoretical approach and the experiment will provide sophistical models relevant to catalytic processes. Quantum chemical methods based onthe correlated ab initio or DFT levels will describe the active sites, while the rigidity and effects of the environment will be included using of molecular mechanics and dynamics. The aim of the project is to provide general approaches - softwares formodelling of nano-structured catalysts, and procedures for development of catalyst structures for important processes of transformation of NOx to nitrogen, selective oxidation of hydrocarbons and electrocatalytic proceses in fuel cells. mathematic simulation; quantum chemical calculation; nano-structure; metals; metal oxide oxides; reactivity; catalysis; electrocatalysis	Development of a program environment for mathematic simulations and predictions in catalysis and electrocatalysis Procedures for mathematic simulation and prediction of reactivity of nano-structures of metals and oxides in solid matrices for (electro)catalytic processes will be developed. The base for the design and evaluation of the models will comprise spectroscopic, diffraction and microscopy data characterizing the reactivity on the atomic/molecular level. Combination of the theoretical approach and the experiment will provide sophistical models relevant to catalytic processes. Quantum chemical methods based onthe correlated ab initio or DFT levels will describe the active sites, while the rigidity and effects of the environment will be included using of molecular mechanics and dynamics. The aim of the project is to provide general approaches - softwares formodelling of nano-structured catalysts, and procedures for development of catalyst structures for important processes of transformation of NOx to nitrogen, selective oxidation of hydrocarbons and electrocatalytic proceses in fuel cells. mathematic simulation; quantum chemical calculation; nano-structure; metals; metal oxide oxides; reactivity; catalysis; electrocatalysis
Computer modelling of chmical structures for the design of macromolecular systems with new biological, mechanical and electronic properties Mathematical modeling of the structure of macromolecular systems is successfully used on one hand in the prediction of properties and behavior of compounds difficult to prepare and requiring long-time planning, on the other in analysis of compounds already obtained. Methods of computer study of macromolecular systems pose extreme demands on computing rates and size of operational memory. The object of the project is application of the methods of quantum chemical molecular modeling and structure analysisby the methods of molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics on macromolecular systems, mainly their extension from simple models to systems applicable in practice. Extended possibilities will be used for effective development and designing of biologically active macromolecules in the field of targeted drug delivery, gene therapy and tissue replacements, biomimetic polymers able to perform work, nanostructurally organized hybrid polymer networks and molecular optoelectronic elements. computer modeling; simulation of macromolecular systems; quantum chemical calculations; molecular mechanics; molecular dynamics; grug delivery; tissue replacement; optoelectronic elements; nanostructure polymer networks	Computer modelling of chmical structures for the design of macromolecular systems with new biological, mechanical and electronic properties Mathematical modeling of the structure of macromolecular systems is successfully used on one hand in the prediction of properties and behavior of compounds difficult to prepare and requiring long-time planning, on the other in analysis of compounds already obtained. Methods of computer study of macromolecular systems pose extreme demands on computing rates and size of operational memory. The object of the project is application of the methods of quantum chemical molecular modeling and structure analysisby the methods of molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics on macromolecular systems, mainly their extension from simple models to systems applicable in practice. Extended possibilities will be used for effective development and designing of biologically active macromolecules in the field of targeted drug delivery, gene therapy and tissue replacements, biomimetic polymers able to perform work, nanostructurally organized hybrid polymer networks and molecular optoelectronic elements. computer modeling; simulation of macromolecular systems; quantum chemical calculations; molecular mechanics; molecular dynamics; grug delivery; tissue replacement; optoelectronic elements; nanostructure polymer networks
Applicationof advanced simulation methods for studying the structure, physico-chemical properties, and preparationof composites and nanomaterials The project deals with the development and subsequent applications of new methods and algoritms for computer modeling and molecular simulations in material research, particularly for utilization of nanomaterials as nanoreactors, and for materials with the complex surface and/or bulk structure. The target of the research are (1) morphological properties of materials and their relation to other physico-chemical properties, and (2) physico-chemical processes at or near the surface. The goal of the projectis the development of molecular simulation methodology for chemically reacting systems in nanopores, and development of morphological analysis methodology for optimization of the laser welding technology. The applied methodology starts with the development and optimization of appropriate models and algorithms that are followed by the investigation of the models and assessment of the results and ends with applications of the models to selected industrial problems. particle modeling; fluid modeling; molecular simulations; Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics; reaction ensemble; image processing; composite materials; nanomaterials; morphology of surfaces; welding; thin films	Applicationof advanced simulation methods for studying the structure, physico-chemical properties, and preparationof composites and nanomaterials The project deals with the development and subsequent applications of new methods and algoritms for computer modeling and molecular simulations in material research, particularly for utilization of nanomaterials as nanoreactors, and for materials with the complex surface and/or bulk structure. The target of the research are (1) morphological properties of materials and their relation to other physico-chemical properties, and (2) physico-chemical processes at or near the surface. The goal of the projectis the development of molecular simulation methodology for chemically reacting systems in nanopores, and development of morphological analysis methodology for optimization of the laser welding technology. The applied methodology starts with the development and optimization of appropriate models and algorithms that are followed by the investigation of the models and assessment of the results and ends with applications of the models to selected industrial problems. particle modeling; fluid modeling; molecular simulations; Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics; reaction ensemble; image processing; composite materials; nanomaterials; morphology of surfaces; welding; thin films
Molecular simulations at extreme experimental conditions: Application of advanced methods to geochemistry The project deals with the development and subsequent applications of new methods and algoritms for computer modeling and molecular simulations in geochemistry, particularly for geological fluid systems at extreme experimental conditions. The target of the research are (1) state and phase behavior of geological fluids at high temperatures and high pressures, and (2) physico-chemical properties of geological fluid systems at porous media. The goal of the project is the development of molecular simulationmethodology for high-density chemically-reacting fluid systems in bulk and confinement. The applied methodology starts with the development and optimization of appropriate models and algorithms that are followed by the investigation of the models and assessment of the results and ends with applications of the models to selected geological problems. molecular simulations; Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics; reaction ensemble; physico-chemical properties; geochemistry; geological fluid systems; rock inclusions	Molecular simulations at extreme experimental conditions: Application of advanced methods to geochemistry The project deals with the development and subsequent applications of new methods and algoritms for computer modeling and molecular simulations in geochemistry, particularly for geological fluid systems at extreme experimental conditions. The target of the research are (1) state and phase behavior of geological fluids at high temperatures and high pressures, and (2) physico-chemical properties of geological fluid systems at porous media. The goal of the project is the development of molecular simulationmethodology for high-density chemically-reacting fluid systems in bulk and confinement. The applied methodology starts with the development and optimization of appropriate models and algorithms that are followed by the investigation of the models and assessment of the results and ends with applications of the models to selected geological problems. molecular simulations; Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics; reaction ensemble; physico-chemical properties; geochemistry; geological fluid systems; rock inclusions
Participation in the evolution of the standardization for embedded software for automotive industry The project objective is defined in order to include Czech Republic to active partitipation in European software technology process for standardization of automotive software. The project background is constituted on experience with partitipation on European R&D projects under ITEA umbrella for embedded systems methodologies such as DESS, EMPRESS and technology Processor Expert, awarded by IST prize 2001. In order to meet project goals are defined key areas: 1. Active partitipation on European standardization process in open consortiums (Autosar), leaded by industry leaders such as Daimler-Chrysler, Porsche, VW, Audi, Motorola, etc. 2. Development of matching development tools to standardization requirements. This includes following areas: developmentof software technologies and tools; integration of new technologies with existing tools in automotive toolchain; development of formal processes and methodologies according standardization requirements; certification, validation. automotive; standardization; hardware abstraction; OEM initiative; Processor Expert; component oriented design approach; expert knowledge systems; microprocessors; ECU; embedded systems; technologies; codesign; code generation; development tools	Participation in the evolution of the standardization for embedded software for automotive industry The project objective is defined in order to include Czech Republic to active partitipation in European software technology process for standardization of automotive software. The project background is constituted on experience with partitipation on European R&D projects under ITEA umbrella for embedded systems methodologies such as DESS, EMPRESS and technology Processor Expert, awarded by IST prize 2001. In order to meet project goals are defined key areas: 1. Active partitipation on European standardization process in open consortiums (Autosar), leaded by industry leaders such as Daimler-Chrysler, Porsche, VW, Audi, Motorola, etc. 2. Development of matching development tools to standardization requirements. This includes following areas: developmentof software technologies and tools; integration of new technologies with existing tools in automotive toolchain; development of formal processes and methodologies according standardization requirements; certification, validation. automotive; standardization; hardware abstraction; OEM initiative; Processor Expert; component oriented design approach; expert knowledge systems; microprocessors; ECU; embedded systems; technologies; codesign; code generation; development tools
Automatic Acquisition of Virtual Reality Models from Real World Scenes The key objective of this assessment research project is to study and verify single methods required for a system which, could capture detailed virtual reality models from images of real world scenes automatically, without interaction with a human observer. The models need to contain 3D shapes as complex as those that we are familiar with from our everyday experience. Shape alone is not enough, because the real world has an infinite variety of colours and textures, which also need to be included in virtual worlds to have a satisfactory look and feel. The challenging features of the problem are scene segmentation, shape inference from segmented scenes, and BTF texture modelling. Each of them is a difficult pattern recognition or computer vision problemof its own. virtual reality; augmented reality; image segmentation; texture modelling	Automatic Acquisition of Virtual Reality Models from Real World Scenes The key objective of this assessment research project is to study and verify single methods required for a system which, could capture detailed virtual reality models from images of real world scenes automatically, without interaction with a human observer. The models need to contain 3D shapes as complex as those that we are familiar with from our everyday experience. Shape alone is not enough, because the real world has an infinite variety of colours and textures, which also need to be included in virtual worlds to have a satisfactory look and feel. The challenging features of the problem are scene segmentation, shape inference from segmented scenes, and BTF texture modelling. Each of them is a difficult pattern recognition or computer vision problemof its own. virtual reality; augmented reality; image segmentation; texture modelling
Rapid prototyping tools for development of HW-accelerated embedded image- and video-processing applications The goal of the project is to set up tools enabling to speed-up design of systems using hardware acceleration of image and video processing algorithms, with the intention to facilitate industrial application of the advanced, computationally intensive algorithms in this field. Libraries of hardware and DSP macros of selected algorithms and their simulation equivalents will be developed in the project. A possibility to exploit dynamic FPGA reconfiguration for implementation of algorithms will be investigated - building on the results of the RECONF project, previously solved in the laboratory of proposer. An architecture of a multi-level environment for rapid application design and configuration, using these libraries, will also be examined. This environment, should, at the lower level, use relatively simple scripting language and, at the higher level, some rapid development tool. We assume the Matlab/Simulink environemnt and/or the high-level HW-oriented languages (HandelC, SystemC). digital image and video processing; hardware acceleration of image processing; embedded systems; FPGA	Rapid prototyping tools for development of HW-accelerated embedded image- and video-processing applications The goal of the project is to set up tools enabling to speed-up design of systems using hardware acceleration of image and video processing algorithms, with the intention to facilitate industrial application of the advanced, computationally intensive algorithms in this field. Libraries of hardware and DSP macros of selected algorithms and their simulation equivalents will be developed in the project. A possibility to exploit dynamic FPGA reconfiguration for implementation of algorithms will be investigated - building on the results of the RECONF project, previously solved in the laboratory of proposer. An architecture of a multi-level environment for rapid application design and configuration, using these libraries, will also be examined. This environment, should, at the lower level, use relatively simple scripting language and, at the higher level, some rapid development tool. We assume the Matlab/Simulink environemnt and/or the high-level HW-oriented languages (HandelC, SystemC). digital image and video processing; hardware acceleration of image processing; embedded systems; FPGA
Atmospheric boundary layer over complex terrain simulation and results visualization Synergetic complex processes in the atmospheric boundary layer are influenced by meteorological situation, orographic conditions, etc. The processes are influenced by natural and mainly antropogenic air pollution too. Mathematical modeling i. e. numerical solution of the equations of motion is the main tool to predict flow, temperature, concentration fields. A model of the proceses including the turbulence model, energy balance and concentration will be developed and suitable boundary conditions will bespecified. Numerical solution of the system of model prognostic equations based on control volumes and finite difference techniques will be proposed and visualization technique will be developed for better results interpretation. turbulence; atmosphere; air pollution; finite difference; visualization	Atmospheric boundary layer over complex terrain simulation and results visualization Synergetic complex processes in the atmospheric boundary layer are influenced by meteorological situation, orographic conditions, etc. The processes are influenced by natural and mainly antropogenic air pollution too. Mathematical modeling i. e. numerical solution of the equations of motion is the main tool to predict flow, temperature, concentration fields. A model of the proceses including the turbulence model, energy balance and concentration will be developed and suitable boundary conditions will bespecified. Numerical solution of the system of model prognostic equations based on control volumes and finite difference techniques will be proposed and visualization technique will be developed for better results interpretation. turbulence; atmosphere; air pollution; finite difference; visualization
Research and development of parallel procedures for modeling continuum mechanics tasks, implementation and applications. Creating an e-learning tool. The success or failure in modelling very large and non-standard continuum mechanics problems crucially depends on a proper choice of numerical methods and their efficient parallelization - since the problems are not inherently parallel the threads of parallelism are to be found within the core of mathematical procedures. Project aims at improvement of the state of art in modelling continuum mechanics tasks, employing domain decomposition and multigrid approaches through FETI and BDDC methods, designingefficient parallel CG solvers, preconditioners and multifrontal solver. Thorough testing and verification on real-time problems and subsequent implementation into in-house finite element package, being built and maintained in IT, is intended. Resulting open-source code will be available to academic community. Industrial applications (biomechanics, nuclear industry) will be treated. E-learning tool dealing with numerical methods and continuum mechanics modelling will be created. modelling continuum mechanics; finite element method; parallel procedures; domain decomposition and multigrid; FETI and BDDC methods; multifrontal method; gradient solvers; preconditioners; industrial applications; e-learning tool	Research and development of parallel procedures for modeling continuum mechanics tasks, implementation and applications. Creating an e-learning tool. The success or failure in modelling very large and non-standard continuum mechanics problems crucially depends on a proper choice of numerical methods and their efficient parallelization - since the problems are not inherently parallel the threads of parallelism are to be found within the core of mathematical procedures. Project aims at improvement of the state of art in modelling continuum mechanics tasks, employing domain decomposition and multigrid approaches through FETI and BDDC methods, designingefficient parallel CG solvers, preconditioners and multifrontal solver. Thorough testing and verification on real-time problems and subsequent implementation into in-house finite element package, being built and maintained in IT, is intended. Resulting open-source code will be available to academic community. Industrial applications (biomechanics, nuclear industry) will be treated. E-learning tool dealing with numerical methods and continuum mechanics modelling will be created. modelling continuum mechanics; finite element method; parallel procedures; domain decomposition and multigrid; FETI and BDDC methods; multifrontal method; gradient solvers; preconditioners; industrial applications; e-learning tool
Fullerenes and nanotubes as building blocks for nanotechnology The proposed research concentrates on calculations of stabilities, reactivities and properties of fullerenes and nanotubes. Advanced techniques of computational chemistry will be applied in order to gain a deeper insight into the nature of fullerene/nanotube synthesis and functional properties of the species. It will primarily deal with fullerenes and carbon nanotubes though endohedral fullerenes, heterofullerenes, and heteronanotubes will also be considered. The research should expand the present verylimited knowledge of stabilities of carbon aggregates and thermodynamic, kinetic and catalytic factors involved in the formation mechanism. The understanding will offer a more rational approach to production, and also to screening of species regarding aparticular nano-functional property, especially for application in molecular electronics, molecular memories, quantum computing and other nanotechnologies. fullerenes; nanotubes; computational chemistry	Fullerenes and nanotubes as building blocks for nanotechnology The proposed research concentrates on calculations of stabilities, reactivities and properties of fullerenes and nanotubes. Advanced techniques of computational chemistry will be applied in order to gain a deeper insight into the nature of fullerene/nanotube synthesis and functional properties of the species. It will primarily deal with fullerenes and carbon nanotubes though endohedral fullerenes, heterofullerenes, and heteronanotubes will also be considered. The research should expand the present verylimited knowledge of stabilities of carbon aggregates and thermodynamic, kinetic and catalytic factors involved in the formation mechanism. The understanding will offer a more rational approach to production, and also to screening of species regarding aparticular nano-functional property, especially for application in molecular electronics, molecular memories, quantum computing and other nanotechnologies. fullerenes; nanotubes; computational chemistry
Dynamic Reliability Quantification and Modelling Most of industrial systems are dynamic. Dynamic reliability includes the study of stochastic processes (and possible interactions between both stochastic and deterministic processes) involving system dynamics when the emphasis is put on failures characterized by the exit of a safety domain. This approach to reliability study is completely new. The project is focussed on research and development of the new algorithms and computing codes used to solve the dynamic reliability problems. Main emphasis is puton simulation techniques. Expected results: new non-traditional methods and algorithms (mainly simulation) to solve the dynamic reliability problems. Reliability characteristics will be possible to determine, respecting dynamic behaviour of the systems.Obtained results can be used for example, to model gas pipeline system, distributed control system, or for the comparison purpose, taking into account topical state of the research in foreign countries. dynamic reliability; simulation approach; Monte Carlo; industrial applications	Dynamic Reliability Quantification and Modelling Most of industrial systems are dynamic. Dynamic reliability includes the study of stochastic processes (and possible interactions between both stochastic and deterministic processes) involving system dynamics when the emphasis is put on failures characterized by the exit of a safety domain. This approach to reliability study is completely new. The project is focussed on research and development of the new algorithms and computing codes used to solve the dynamic reliability problems. Main emphasis is puton simulation techniques. Expected results: new non-traditional methods and algorithms (mainly simulation) to solve the dynamic reliability problems. Reliability characteristics will be possible to determine, respecting dynamic behaviour of the systems.Obtained results can be used for example, to model gas pipeline system, distributed control system, or for the comparison purpose, taking into account topical state of the research in foreign countries. dynamic reliability; simulation approach; Monte Carlo; industrial applications
Mathematical modeling of migration and interaction of nanoparticles The project is focused to creation of a mathematical model of utilization of metallic nanoparticles in remediation of subterranean water and contaminated ground. The modelling will be based on a transport-reactive mathematical model, which will simulatemotion of metallic nanoparticles in subterranean water and their interactions with charged underground surface. The model will also describe the kinetics of surface degradation reactions of chlorinated hydrocarbons and oxidation of nanoparticles. The main task of the modelling is to optimise conditions for usage of the technology and to determine its limitations and restrictions. In practice there exist a large number of localities and kinds of contamination that can be cleaned very difficultly or not at all using standard technologies. Good handling the modern technology of remediation, understanding its mechanisms and setting its limitations in real applications will provide us new possibilities of environment improvement. nanoparticles; mathematical modeling; transport process; surface reactions	Mathematical modeling of migration and interaction of nanoparticles The project is focused to creation of a mathematical model of utilization of metallic nanoparticles in remediation of subterranean water and contaminated ground. The modelling will be based on a transport-reactive mathematical model, which will simulatemotion of metallic nanoparticles in subterranean water and their interactions with charged underground surface. The model will also describe the kinetics of surface degradation reactions of chlorinated hydrocarbons and oxidation of nanoparticles. The main task of the modelling is to optimise conditions for usage of the technology and to determine its limitations and restrictions. In practice there exist a large number of localities and kinds of contamination that can be cleaned very difficultly or not at all using standard technologies. Good handling the modern technology of remediation, understanding its mechanisms and setting its limitations in real applications will provide us new possibilities of environment improvement. nanoparticles; mathematical modeling; transport process; surface reactions
Techniques for automatic verification and validation of software and hardware systems The main objective of the project is to create a theoretical and methodological base for computer-aided and automatic verification and validation of large software and hardware systems. The project aims to support the development of methodologies, technologies and tools of software engineering in automatic and computer-aided verificacion. The project is to contribute to the research into new technologies for a realistic modelling of large systems, including real-time systems and probabilistic systems, especially with respect to their safety. The aim is to design effective implementations of these models as well as efficient verification technologies based on such models. The project will focus on embedded, distributed and parallel systems. Taking intoconsideration the complexity of verification processes, the aim is to design methodologies that will make the maximum possible use of new information technologies, such as parallel and distributed computing and hierarchical memories. computer aided and automatic verification; theory and technology of modelling of large systems; methodology of software engineering; embedded systems; parallel and distributed systems; real time systems	Techniques for automatic verification and validation of software and hardware systems The main objective of the project is to create a theoretical and methodological base for computer-aided and automatic verification and validation of large software and hardware systems. The project aims to support the development of methodologies, technologies and tools of software engineering in automatic and computer-aided verificacion. The project is to contribute to the research into new technologies for a realistic modelling of large systems, including real-time systems and probabilistic systems, especially with respect to their safety. The aim is to design effective implementations of these models as well as efficient verification technologies based on such models. The project will focus on embedded, distributed and parallel systems. Taking intoconsideration the complexity of verification processes, the aim is to design methodologies that will make the maximum possible use of new information technologies, such as parallel and distributed computing and hierarchical memories. computer aided and automatic verification; theory and technology of modelling of large systems; methodology of software engineering; embedded systems; parallel and distributed systems; real time systems
VITESPO-Virtual testing of safety and reliability of structures Objective modelling of structural safety and reliability requires the application of advanced nonlinear methods based on fracture mechanics. Utilization of these methods in praxis is very difficult without an appropriate safety concept. The project objective is to develop numerical methods and algorithms for effective synthesis of nonlinear and probabilistic methods. Existing nonlinear solutions of the applicants will be extended for effective simulation of large scale problems utilizing iterative solvers, methods of multiscale modelling and Grid technologies. The method of stochastic finite elements within the framework of the finite elemement analysis models the probability of input parameters at two levels: random variables or random fields. Methodsof stochastic simulation and neural networks will be also used for identification of material parameters. nonlinear simulation; reinforced concrete structures; finite element method; computational mechanics; fracture mechanics; probability; reliability; safety of structures; Grid technology; multiscale modelling	VITESPO-Virtual testing of safety and reliability of structures Objective modelling of structural safety and reliability requires the application of advanced nonlinear methods based on fracture mechanics. Utilization of these methods in praxis is very difficult without an appropriate safety concept. The project objective is to develop numerical methods and algorithms for effective synthesis of nonlinear and probabilistic methods. Existing nonlinear solutions of the applicants will be extended for effective simulation of large scale problems utilizing iterative solvers, methods of multiscale modelling and Grid technologies. The method of stochastic finite elements within the framework of the finite elemement analysis models the probability of input parameters at two levels: random variables or random fields. Methodsof stochastic simulation and neural networks will be also used for identification of material parameters. nonlinear simulation; reinforced concrete structures; finite element method; computational mechanics; fracture mechanics; probability; reliability; safety of structures; Grid technology; multiscale modelling
Research and implementation of knowledge management methods in software development and software maintenance Research and usage of methods and algorithms of knowladge managements, in software development and software maintenance and especially maintenance of business systems. New practices should enhance quality and control with implemenatation of software modifications, together with reduction of development time and software development and maintenance charges. We propose to test discovered practices with particular system for business software Sage-KHK. software engineering; knowladge management; business software; development process improvement; software maintenance improvement	Research and implementation of knowledge management methods in software development and software maintenance Research and usage of methods and algorithms of knowladge managements, in software development and software maintenance and especially maintenance of business systems. New practices should enhance quality and control with implemenatation of software modifications, together with reduction of development time and software development and maintenance charges. We propose to test discovered practices with particular system for business software Sage-KHK. software engineering; knowladge management; business software; development process improvement; software maintenance improvement
Reliability-based analysis of geotechnical structures using FEM The project is aimed at the development of complex software tools providing the possibility of a probability-based evaluation of geotechnical structures with the emphasis on dump slopes and underground structures. The attention will be devoted mainly tothe formulation and verification of a reliable material model suitable for the description of the behavior of assumed structures and its implementation within the framework of stochastic simulation techniques and the finite element method. The primary output of the project will be procedures allowing improved prediction of failure probability of geotechnical structures with refernce to evident uncertainties in input parameters, both material and topological. The methods of stochastic simulation togetherwith genetic algorithms will be further utilized for identification of parameters of the proposed model using the inverse approach. nonlinear constitutive modeling; dump slopes; underground structures; finite element method; probability of failure; reliability; stochastic simulation methods; inverse methods; genetic algorithms	Reliability-based analysis of geotechnical structures using FEM The project is aimed at the development of complex software tools providing the possibility of a probability-based evaluation of geotechnical structures with the emphasis on dump slopes and underground structures. The attention will be devoted mainly tothe formulation and verification of a reliable material model suitable for the description of the behavior of assumed structures and its implementation within the framework of stochastic simulation techniques and the finite element method. The primary output of the project will be procedures allowing improved prediction of failure probability of geotechnical structures with refernce to evident uncertainties in input parameters, both material and topological. The methods of stochastic simulation togetherwith genetic algorithms will be further utilized for identification of parameters of the proposed model using the inverse approach. nonlinear constitutive modeling; dump slopes; underground structures; finite element method; probability of failure; reliability; stochastic simulation methods; inverse methods; genetic algorithms
Specification of the transport policy objectives in field of transport service concerned on intergated transport systems The first task of the Project (activities 1-3) is to establish the initial conditions for a realization of transport services model of territory and the description of the foreign experiences and current effort of realization in the Czech Republic. The division between regional and long-distance transport is necessary for further suggestion of a transport services organization. The key part of the Project (activity 4-6) is an establishment of an optionally theoretical model of transport services ofterritory. The description of the theoretical model of transport services of territory and the operational organization and the application examples. The establishment of the transport services standards for a fulfillment of highly quality public services. The specification and evaluation of fruitfulness criteria of a public transport. The financial framework for public transport as criteria of system sustainable with regard to public budgets. The proposed theoretical model will be applied within activ model; dopravní; obsluhy; území; regionální; doprava; dálková; doprava; organizace; provozu; standardy; obsluhy; území; veřejná; služba; kritéria; úspěšnosti; veřejné; dopravy; finanční; rámec; veřejné; dopravy; modelová; případová; studie	Specification of the transport policy objectives in field of transport service concerned on intergated transport systems The first task of the Project (activities 1-3) is to establish the initial conditions for a realization of transport services model of territory and the description of the foreign experiences and current effort of realization in the Czech Republic. The division between regional and long-distance transport is necessary for further suggestion of a transport services organization. The key part of the Project (activity 4-6) is an establishment of an optionally theoretical model of transport services ofterritory. The description of the theoretical model of transport services of territory and the operational organization and the application examples. The establishment of the transport services standards for a fulfillment of highly quality public services. The specification and evaluation of fruitfulness criteria of a public transport. The financial framework for public transport as criteria of system sustainable with regard to public budgets. The proposed theoretical model will be applied within activ model; dopravní; obsluhy; území; regionální; doprava; dálková; doprava; organizace; provozu; standardy; obsluhy; území; veřejná; služba; kritéria; úspěšnosti; veřejné; dopravy; finanční; rámec; veřejné; dopravy; modelová; případová; studie
Development of the system for creation of just environment in transport market including harmonization of charges for use of the transport infrastructure The project tries to find a solution to conditions and possibilities for creation of the just transport market in the Czech Republic in conformance with EU demands. It will enable to the Czech transporters to compete with the foreign transporters both ondomestic as well as on international market. The developed computer model will enable to elaborate changing variants of the input data, opinions and limiting conditions and automatically assessing impacts of implementation of the chosen option. Doprava; Ekonomika; Tržní prostředí; Informatika; Optimalizace; Legislativa	Development of the system for creation of just environment in transport market including harmonization of charges for use of the transport infrastructure The project tries to find a solution to conditions and possibilities for creation of the just transport market in the Czech Republic in conformance with EU demands. It will enable to the Czech transporters to compete with the foreign transporters both ondomestic as well as on international market. The developed computer model will enable to elaborate changing variants of the input data, opinions and limiting conditions and automatically assessing impacts of implementation of the chosen option. Doprava; Ekonomika; Tržní prostředí; Informatika; Optimalizace; Legislativa
Implementing urban road charging in the Czech Republic The main aim of the project is to investigate the possibilities for implementing road charging in Czech cities and answer the questions : what is currently feasible and desirable, and what needs to be done and how if we are to effectively implement an urban road charging scheme in Czech conditions ? The project approach is a combination of 1. research of existing theory and research in the whole country 2. local preparation, analysis, surveys and definition of parameters, in order to effectively proposeand implement a system of road charging in Czech conditions. The subject is analysed from all theoretical and technical angles, always aimed at concrete implementation conditions of the Czech republic in the following five areas 1.Financial, economic and transport aims, schemes and impacts of road charging in cities 2.Public and political acceptability 3.Mapping, comparing and evaluating technical options 4.Organizational and financial models 5.Preparation of legislative ba Mýto; Zpoplatnění; komunikace; EFC; Poplatky; Veřejná; přijatelnost; Redukce; kongesce	Implementing urban road charging in the Czech Republic The main aim of the project is to investigate the possibilities for implementing road charging in Czech cities and answer the questions : what is currently feasible and desirable, and what needs to be done and how if we are to effectively implement an urban road charging scheme in Czech conditions ? The project approach is a combination of 1. research of existing theory and research in the whole country 2. local preparation, analysis, surveys and definition of parameters, in order to effectively proposeand implement a system of road charging in Czech conditions. The subject is analysed from all theoretical and technical angles, always aimed at concrete implementation conditions of the Czech republic in the following five areas 1.Financial, economic and transport aims, schemes and impacts of road charging in cities 2.Public and political acceptability 3.Mapping, comparing and evaluating technical options 4.Organizational and financial models 5.Preparation of legislative ba Mýto; Zpoplatnění; komunikace; EFC; Poplatky; Veřejná; přijatelnost; Redukce; kongesce
Research into cost-effectiveness of telematics system in transport The project solves the development and calibration of a metodology to determine ITS cost-effectiveness in Czech conditions in such a way that all ITS costs and benefits will be evaluated together with its synergy in relation to transport safety and smooth flow of transport ITS; dopravní telematika; účinnost ITS; modelování ITS	Research into cost-effectiveness of telematics system in transport The project solves the development and calibration of a metodology to determine ITS cost-effectiveness in Czech conditions in such a way that all ITS costs and benefits will be evaluated together with its synergy in relation to transport safety and smooth flow of transport ITS; dopravní telematika; účinnost ITS; modelování ITS
Study of a radio-block control and safety system for secondary lines and light-duty railway traffic. The objective of this Project is to define the principles for designing a safety and control system for secondary and tramway lines. The České dráhy[Czech Railways] network has a large number of regional and secondary lines without any safety system, andtherefore their safety is of a low standard. A similar situation exists also on special tramway lines. Lines with no safety system have a low traffic safety and also high traffic personnel costs. Deployment of classic safety systems on these lines is financially demanding and the return on investment due to the low utilisation of these lines very long. This Project should define the principles of security system solutions on these lines, with potential future mixed traffic of classic trains and tramwaycars. radioblok pro vedlejší tratě	Study of a radio-block control and safety system for secondary lines and light-duty railway traffic. The objective of this Project is to define the principles for designing a safety and control system for secondary and tramway lines. The České dráhy[Czech Railways] network has a large number of regional and secondary lines without any safety system, andtherefore their safety is of a low standard. A similar situation exists also on special tramway lines. Lines with no safety system have a low traffic safety and also high traffic personnel costs. Deployment of classic safety systems on these lines is financially demanding and the return on investment due to the low utilisation of these lines very long. This Project should define the principles of security system solutions on these lines, with potential future mixed traffic of classic trains and tramwaycars. radioblok pro vedlejší tratě
BLACKBOX Only few objective information is available after a traffic accident today. A "BLACKBOX" will enter maximum of operational information on a vehicle (time, velocity, activity of brakes, activity of ABS, lights, blinkers, operational engine measures, temperature of vicinity and engine,...). This information will contribute to a faster remotion of the obstacle from the road and together with this to more objective definition of an extent of a quilt and faster solution of an average. Provozní informace; záznam provozních informací; black box; řešení nehody; vozidlové systémy	BLACKBOX Only few objective information is available after a traffic accident today. A "BLACKBOX" will enter maximum of operational information on a vehicle (time, velocity, activity of brakes, activity of ABS, lights, blinkers, operational engine measures, temperature of vicinity and engine,...). This information will contribute to a faster remotion of the obstacle from the road and together with this to more objective definition of an extent of a quilt and faster solution of an average. Provozní informace; záznam provozních informací; black box; řešení nehody; vozidlové systémy
Optimalization of roads design elements outside built areas. The aim of the project is revision and proposition of roads design elements, especially from the view of road safety and new traffic trends. These elements should be included to technical standards. Návrhové prvky; návrhové vozidlo; návrhová rychlost; délka rozhledu; směrový oblouk; stoupání; šířka komunikace; zrychlení a zpomalení	Optimalization of roads design elements outside built areas. The aim of the project is revision and proposition of roads design elements, especially from the view of road safety and new traffic trends. These elements should be included to technical standards. Návrhové prvky; návrhové vozidlo; návrhová rychlost; délka rozhledu; směrový oblouk; stoupání; šířka komunikace; zrychlení a zpomalení
Actualisation of calculation models for determining the capacity of uncontrolled level cross-roads The aim of the proposed project is to analyze the currently used methods for calculating capacity of the uncontrolled cross-roads. The project will analyze the methods used in the Czech Republic as well as the methods used in other EU countries, or if necessary also those used in other countries (HCM). The key element of the project is the explicit reference to the German research. Through the research, it will be necessary to verify the input presumptions of the currently used methods. Based on the analysis of the theoretical bases of already used methods together with the use of statistical-stochastic analysis of the data obtained from the research, we will try to propose adjustments to the existing and currently used methods, or we will design and propose an absolutely new method. dopravní inženýrství; kapacita křižovatek; dopravní průzkum; výpočtové metody	Actualisation of calculation models for determining the capacity of uncontrolled level cross-roads The aim of the proposed project is to analyze the currently used methods for calculating capacity of the uncontrolled cross-roads. The project will analyze the methods used in the Czech Republic as well as the methods used in other EU countries, or if necessary also those used in other countries (HCM). The key element of the project is the explicit reference to the German research. Through the research, it will be necessary to verify the input presumptions of the currently used methods. Based on the analysis of the theoretical bases of already used methods together with the use of statistical-stochastic analysis of the data obtained from the research, we will try to propose adjustments to the existing and currently used methods, or we will design and propose an absolutely new method. dopravní inženýrství; kapacita křižovatek; dopravní průzkum; výpočtové metody
Traffic control in centers of historical cities The aim of the project is a design of hierarchical closed-loop control of urban transportation network, concerning especially the centers of historical cities. The control will work on both local levels of microregions and higher level which will coordinate the microregions to avoid collisions between them. After this, a control of exception traffic states will follow which are car collisions, preferences, etc. For the control synthesis and methods like linear programming, LQGand procedures based on markov chains will be used. Project results will be currently tested on simulated and real traffic systems. Modelování; optimalizace; identifikace; hierarchické řízení; dopravní mikrooblast; saturace dopravy	Traffic control in centers of historical cities The aim of the project is a design of hierarchical closed-loop control of urban transportation network, concerning especially the centers of historical cities. The control will work on both local levels of microregions and higher level which will coordinate the microregions to avoid collisions between them. After this, a control of exception traffic states will follow which are car collisions, preferences, etc. For the control synthesis and methods like linear programming, LQGand procedures based on markov chains will be used. Project results will be currently tested on simulated and real traffic systems. Modelování; optimalizace; identifikace; hierarchické řízení; dopravní mikrooblast; saturace dopravy
Optimalizace provozu silničních tunelů Project optimize service in tunnel buildings. It reaserch driver behavior in road tunnles and it devise each traffic response ventilation. Project try to increase driver safety and komfort, without increasing service cost. optimalizace provozu; provozní náklady; silniční tunel; úseková rychlost; větrání	Optimalizace provozu silničních tunelů Project optimize service in tunnel buildings. It reaserch driver behavior in road tunnles and it devise each traffic response ventilation. Project try to increase driver safety and komfort, without increasing service cost. optimalizace provozu; provozní náklady; silniční tunel; úseková rychlost; větrání
Automated control and changes detection system for setup security of information systems based on BS7799 security policy specification. The solution is focused on conceiving of a monitoring system for security policy setup and control of information systems. The system will be based on BS7799 standard security policy specification. The goal is increasing of protection and security of aninformation systems running on the Microsoft Windows servers operating systems. The system will enable to automated inspect of the state of information system security parameters and test them in compliance with the requested security policy. The system will be able to automated find out security setup changes. The information about inspects and security setup changes will be saved for appropriate analyses and will be sent to users by e-mail. This solution will be able to central manage more informationsystems. The developed software product will be implemented into security information system named ISOKR a into the other providers information systems. monitorovací; systém; bezpečnostní; politika; bezpečnost; informačních; systémů; ochrana; informačních; systémů; dopravní; informační; systémy; standard; BS7799; Microsoft; Windows; ISOKR	Automated control and changes detection system for setup security of information systems based on BS7799 security policy specification. The solution is focused on conceiving of a monitoring system for security policy setup and control of information systems. The system will be based on BS7799 standard security policy specification. The goal is increasing of protection and security of aninformation systems running on the Microsoft Windows servers operating systems. The system will enable to automated inspect of the state of information system security parameters and test them in compliance with the requested security policy. The system will be able to automated find out security setup changes. The information about inspects and security setup changes will be saved for appropriate analyses and will be sent to users by e-mail. This solution will be able to central manage more informationsystems. The developed software product will be implemented into security information system named ISOKR a into the other providers information systems. monitorovací; systém; bezpečnostní; politika; bezpečnost; informačních; systémů; ochrana; informačních; systémů; dopravní; informační; systémy; standard; BS7799; Microsoft; Windows; ISOKR
Safety policy for interlocking plant data transmission in rail transport Project "Safety policy for interlocking plant data transmission in rail transport" is aimed at developing the methodology for securing and controlling a safe data transmission through open communication networks in context of Czech Republic rail transport. First and foremost a study will be conducted, with the objective of defining distinct areas impacted by the safety policy. The pivotal objective is a preparation of methodology for the safety policy that must be based on applicable EU standards, for example EN 50126, EN 50128, EN50129. Further, the requirements for standard EN 50159-1/2 will be developed with the aim to sufficiently delimit the follow-on concept of a long term development of the Safety policy for interlocking plant data transmissionin rail transport. The project results (prescribed safety policy ) will be evaluated in a pilot project. Řízení; správa a administrativa; Obecná matematika; Aplikovaná statistika; operační výzkum; Teorie a systémy řízení; Teorie informace - Kryptografie; Elektronika a optoelektronika; elektrotechnika; Počítačový hardware a software; Pozemní dopravní systémy	Safety policy for interlocking plant data transmission in rail transport Project "Safety policy for interlocking plant data transmission in rail transport" is aimed at developing the methodology for securing and controlling a safe data transmission through open communication networks in context of Czech Republic rail transport. First and foremost a study will be conducted, with the objective of defining distinct areas impacted by the safety policy. The pivotal objective is a preparation of methodology for the safety policy that must be based on applicable EU standards, for example EN 50126, EN 50128, EN50129. Further, the requirements for standard EN 50159-1/2 will be developed with the aim to sufficiently delimit the follow-on concept of a long term development of the Safety policy for interlocking plant data transmissionin rail transport. The project results (prescribed safety policy ) will be evaluated in a pilot project. Řízení; správa a administrativa; Obecná matematika; Aplikovaná statistika; operační výzkum; Teorie a systémy řízení; Teorie informace - Kryptografie; Elektronika a optoelektronika; elektrotechnika; Počítačový hardware a software; Pozemní dopravní systémy
The analyzis of requirements to build the bicycling infrastructure in the Czech Republic. The aim of the project is to make a complex research, which would assess the infrastructure conditions of the bicycling possibilities and which would suggest a group of arrangements towards increasing of its atractivity. The degree of its utility will bediscussed too. A high priority of the project is based on information of the public about bicycling. Withing the project a new information portal will be opened. This portal will include a databaze and statistical data about the cycle transportation.A guidebook about specific aspects of the cycling based on a large research will be published. An analyze of financing of infrastracture will be included in the project. Informační portál; databáze; metodika; finance	The analyzis of requirements to build the bicycling infrastructure in the Czech Republic. The aim of the project is to make a complex research, which would assess the infrastructure conditions of the bicycling possibilities and which would suggest a group of arrangements towards increasing of its atractivity. The degree of its utility will bediscussed too. A high priority of the project is based on information of the public about bicycling. Withing the project a new information portal will be opened. This portal will include a databaze and statistical data about the cycle transportation.A guidebook about specific aspects of the cycling based on a large research will be published. An analyze of financing of infrastracture will be included in the project. Informační portál; databáze; metodika; finance
Automated data exchange between traffic crisis information systems with common, versatile and implemented interface based on web services. The solution is focused on conceiving of an automated data exchange interface for actual crisis information systems. Design of this interface will enable to develop future crisis information systems in compliance with current systems. There will be designed and developed an implementation for this interface. This implementation will be able to provide a platform for data exchange between current crisis information systems KISMDS, KISPKP and KISKD. This interface implementation will be based on application-application internet data exchange technology named web services. The developed software product will manage a data exchange by synchronization of time signal between data servers of crisis information systems. There will be created easy installed client for mobile devices of notebook type to enable a data exchange between this device and data servers of crisis information systems. In this case the mobile device operator demand will run it. krizové; informační; systémy; dopravní; informační; systémy; krizové; řízení; výměna; dat; rozhraní; informačních; systémů; webové; služby; internet; KIS	Automated data exchange between traffic crisis information systems with common, versatile and implemented interface based on web services. The solution is focused on conceiving of an automated data exchange interface for actual crisis information systems. Design of this interface will enable to develop future crisis information systems in compliance with current systems. There will be designed and developed an implementation for this interface. This implementation will be able to provide a platform for data exchange between current crisis information systems KISMDS, KISPKP and KISKD. This interface implementation will be based on application-application internet data exchange technology named web services. The developed software product will manage a data exchange by synchronization of time signal between data servers of crisis information systems. There will be created easy installed client for mobile devices of notebook type to enable a data exchange between this device and data servers of crisis information systems. In this case the mobile device operator demand will run it. krizové; informační; systémy; dopravní; informační; systémy; krizové; řízení; výměna; dat; rozhraní; informačních; systémů; webové; služby; internet; KIS
Optimisation of Crisis communication of Ministry of Transport with other authorities of Crisis control using the means of transport systems information data transfer The Project "Optimisation of Crisis communication of Ministry of Transport with other authorities of Crisis control using the means of transport systems information data transfer" analyses the process of future Situation Centre set-up. The project is divided into four parts: - Inventory of existing means usable for the future Centre - Creation of a universal Communication Protocol - Creation of the Optimisation Model - Verification of the model on simulated data. The result shall provide a complete theoretical base for optimisation of necessary future investment sources for the Centre creation, incl. the design of the Centre set-up in accordance with the optimisation process results. Since the result shall be an individual application of a general optimisation algorithm, it will enable assessment of optimisation of other projects in the sphere of investment costs, by a minimum modification of the input data structures. Situační centrum; systémová integrace datových zdrojů; univerzální komunikační protokol; optimalizace investičních nákladů; ochrana vynaložených investic; návrh Situačního centra; krizové komunikace	Optimisation of Crisis communication of Ministry of Transport with other authorities of Crisis control using the means of transport systems information data transfer The Project "Optimisation of Crisis communication of Ministry of Transport with other authorities of Crisis control using the means of transport systems information data transfer" analyses the process of future Situation Centre set-up. The project is divided into four parts: - Inventory of existing means usable for the future Centre - Creation of a universal Communication Protocol - Creation of the Optimisation Model - Verification of the model on simulated data. The result shall provide a complete theoretical base for optimisation of necessary future investment sources for the Centre creation, incl. the design of the Centre set-up in accordance with the optimisation process results. Since the result shall be an individual application of a general optimisation algorithm, it will enable assessment of optimisation of other projects in the sphere of investment costs, by a minimum modification of the input data structures. Situační centrum; systémová integrace datových zdrojů; univerzální komunikační protokol; optimalizace investičních nákladů; ochrana vynaložených investic; návrh Situačního centra; krizové komunikace
Evaluation of the transportation infrastructure as critical element of national infrastructure from the safeguard of the state fundamental function point of view. There is not a general disposable tool in Czech Republic nowadays, which could allow to evaluate the resistance of the transportation infrastructure on the different levels of the state administration and to recognize their critical elements regarding tocontext of national infrastructure. The goal of the proposed project is to develope that tool. Because of the elementary task of system analyses which is the analyse of the behaviuor of the system sets and looking for that set elements, of which inputchanges of the parameters evokes the biggest response in behaviour of the system, the evaluation of the critical points of the transportation infrastructure is based on searching of critical elements and vulnerability analyses of transportation infrastructure. For the solution of the problem there was selected an analytical method by the evaluated reticular graph and developed relevant tools of transportation infrastructure modelling. dopravní infrastruktura; kritičnost infrastruktury; kritické prvky infrastruktury; analýza systémů; modelování soustavy; krizové řízení; civiní nouzové plánování	Evaluation of the transportation infrastructure as critical element of national infrastructure from the safeguard of the state fundamental function point of view. There is not a general disposable tool in Czech Republic nowadays, which could allow to evaluate the resistance of the transportation infrastructure on the different levels of the state administration and to recognize their critical elements regarding tocontext of national infrastructure. The goal of the proposed project is to develope that tool. Because of the elementary task of system analyses which is the analyse of the behaviuor of the system sets and looking for that set elements, of which inputchanges of the parameters evokes the biggest response in behaviour of the system, the evaluation of the critical points of the transportation infrastructure is based on searching of critical elements and vulnerability analyses of transportation infrastructure. For the solution of the problem there was selected an analytical method by the evaluated reticular graph and developed relevant tools of transportation infrastructure modelling. dopravní infrastruktura; kritičnost infrastruktury; kritické prvky infrastruktury; analýza systémů; modelování soustavy; krizové řízení; civiní nouzové plánování
The economy of implementation of alternative fuels in transport and possibilities of internalisation of external costs by transport in the Czech Republic. The transportation is one of the basic services in each society - it makes transport of people and goods possible. There are negative impacts of the transport (except the positives) on the society and environment with the cumulative transport performance. There are several main aims of this project: review of the gradual implementation an alternative fuels in transportation processes and an proposal of the economical means, which can be used as a stimulation instrument for the usage of the thrifty typesof transport in relation to the environmental. The usage of the alternative fuels and individual economical measure will be criticized from the economical, environmental and social aspects. Doprava; alternativní paliva; životní prostředí; externality; ekonomické nástroje	The economy of implementation of alternative fuels in transport and possibilities of internalisation of external costs by transport in the Czech Republic. The transportation is one of the basic services in each society - it makes transport of people and goods possible. There are negative impacts of the transport (except the positives) on the society and environment with the cumulative transport performance. There are several main aims of this project: review of the gradual implementation an alternative fuels in transportation processes and an proposal of the economical means, which can be used as a stimulation instrument for the usage of the thrifty typesof transport in relation to the environmental. The usage of the alternative fuels and individual economical measure will be criticized from the economical, environmental and social aspects. Doprava; alternativní paliva; životní prostředí; externality; ekonomické nástroje
CALCULATION OF DIRECT COSTS OF SELECTED GROUPS OF ROAD FREIGHT VEHICLES Public administration of traffic sphere needs sufficient information for its operations. One of the information with wide utility is the knowledge of the calculation of direct costs of selected groups of road freight vehicles and its time evolution. Thisuseful information is possible to get through the sample survey with the use of questionnaire. Respondents of the sample survey will be selected from the Central register of vehicles. They will provide the data mainly about the operational cost of the concrete vehicle. Provided information will be processed into the electronic form. For every group of vehicles the average values of main cost items will be calculated. Based on these items the short and detailed calculation formulas and calculations per1km will be done. The results will be presented during the individual years in the form of the research report. informace; pro; veřejnou; správu; jednicové; náklady; kalkulace; nákladní; vozidlo; výběrové; šetření; silniční; nákladní; doprava	CALCULATION OF DIRECT COSTS OF SELECTED GROUPS OF ROAD FREIGHT VEHICLES Public administration of traffic sphere needs sufficient information for its operations. One of the information with wide utility is the knowledge of the calculation of direct costs of selected groups of road freight vehicles and its time evolution. Thisuseful information is possible to get through the sample survey with the use of questionnaire. Respondents of the sample survey will be selected from the Central register of vehicles. They will provide the data mainly about the operational cost of the concrete vehicle. Provided information will be processed into the electronic form. For every group of vehicles the average values of main cost items will be calculated. Based on these items the short and detailed calculation formulas and calculations per1km will be done. The results will be presented during the individual years in the form of the research report. informace; pro; veřejnou; správu; jednicové; náklady; kalkulace; nákladní; vozidlo; výběrové; šetření; silniční; nákladní; doprava
Decision support system proposal in the public transport service obligation financing. Project solves methodology, data bases and designs a decision making support system of public transport systems in a software form. It defines necessary databases, based on objective criteria sets priorities of limited finance allocation to support public transport. Systém na podporu rozhodování; veřejná doprava; optimalizace nákladů	Decision support system proposal in the public transport service obligation financing. Project solves methodology, data bases and designs a decision making support system of public transport systems in a software form. It defines necessary databases, based on objective criteria sets priorities of limited finance allocation to support public transport. Systém na podporu rozhodování; veřejná doprava; optimalizace nákladů
Effect of quality and degradation of engine oils on amount and composition of exhaust emissions from the view of authorisation of personal cars and their technical conditions. The project is focused on the effect of quality and degradation of engine oils on amount and composition of inorganic as well as organic exhaust emissions from the view of environmental aspects and authorisation of personal cars. Effect of several aspects on amount of regulated emissions (CO, NOx, hydrocarbons - CH), and organic unregulated emissions (polyaromatic hydrocarbons - PAHs, aldehydes, volatile hydrocarbons - VOCs, nitrated compounds) will be highlighted. Among the aspects studied will especially be the following: a) effect of composition of engine oils (mineral oils containing aromatic hydrocarbons and polar compounds, fully synthetic engine oils for prolonged service intervals, future engine oils for engines meeting the EURO IV emissionlimits with decreased concentration of phosphorus and sulphur) b) effect of kilometerage and degree of the oil degradation; attention will especially be paid to emissions of polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) c) effect of technical conditions of the engi osobní automobily; emise výfukových plynů; regulované emise; organické emise; motorový olej; degradace motorového oleje; prodloužené servisní intervaly	Effect of quality and degradation of engine oils on amount and composition of exhaust emissions from the view of authorisation of personal cars and their technical conditions. The project is focused on the effect of quality and degradation of engine oils on amount and composition of inorganic as well as organic exhaust emissions from the view of environmental aspects and authorisation of personal cars. Effect of several aspects on amount of regulated emissions (CO, NOx, hydrocarbons - CH), and organic unregulated emissions (polyaromatic hydrocarbons - PAHs, aldehydes, volatile hydrocarbons - VOCs, nitrated compounds) will be highlighted. Among the aspects studied will especially be the following: a) effect of composition of engine oils (mineral oils containing aromatic hydrocarbons and polar compounds, fully synthetic engine oils for prolonged service intervals, future engine oils for engines meeting the EURO IV emissionlimits with decreased concentration of phosphorus and sulphur) b) effect of kilometerage and degree of the oil degradation; attention will especially be paid to emissions of polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) c) effect of technical conditions of the engi osobní automobily; emise výfukových plynů; regulované emise; organické emise; motorový olej; degradace motorového oleje; prodloužené servisní intervaly
Prediction of Partial Noise Sources of Public-Service Vehicles. The project is focused on the theoretical and experimental investigation of undesirable influence of noise and vibration of the individual sources on the total acoustic emission of means of municipal public transport and proposal of the possibilities oftheir elimination using the suitable methods. It should make possible to connect noise and vibration measurement on real means of transport with the software systems for prediction of noise from the individual noise and vibration sources. After projectfinishing the methodology of noise prediction at means of municipal public transport will be known, which will enable to determine the total noise level inside and outside the vehicle already in the stage of prototype preparation. For the producer itwill mean that on the basis of the theoretically selected components he will be able to propose and assemble a low-noise vehicle already in the model stage. Predikce; Hluk; Vibrace; Prostředky hromadné dopravy; Modální analýza	Prediction of Partial Noise Sources of Public-Service Vehicles. The project is focused on the theoretical and experimental investigation of undesirable influence of noise and vibration of the individual sources on the total acoustic emission of means of municipal public transport and proposal of the possibilities oftheir elimination using the suitable methods. It should make possible to connect noise and vibration measurement on real means of transport with the software systems for prediction of noise from the individual noise and vibration sources. After projectfinishing the methodology of noise prediction at means of municipal public transport will be known, which will enable to determine the total noise level inside and outside the vehicle already in the stage of prototype preparation. For the producer itwill mean that on the basis of the theoretically selected components he will be able to propose and assemble a low-noise vehicle already in the model stage. Predikce; Hluk; Vibrace; Prostředky hromadné dopravy; Modální analýza
Economical, Ecological and Safe Electronical Toll Collection The project goal is to provide research, development and testing of the complex system for determining and picking of the electronic toll with random set and differential rated segments of the Czech roads. With respect to the individual attributes and the technical state of the vehicle will be this toll comprised: 1) Economic component - it cover pass of the vehicle and it acquire the resources for the reconstruction of the roads, 2) Ecological component - it cover harmful effect of emission, 3) Safetycomponent - it cover dangerous style of driving. Technical certain of the electronic toll will be comprised: 1) Modification of the periodical emission control with goal to quantification of the harmful action of the vehicle. 2) Telematic system for monitoring the track, velocity and acceleration of the individual vehicles, including the central register. 3) New original board unit (OBU) for electronic toll collection that uses the data of vehicle technical characteristics, running properties of the en Elektronické mýtné; palubní jednotka; OBU; dynamické a emisní charakteristiky vozidel; bezpečnost provozu vozidel; ITS; dopravní telematika	Economical, Ecological and Safe Electronical Toll Collection The project goal is to provide research, development and testing of the complex system for determining and picking of the electronic toll with random set and differential rated segments of the Czech roads. With respect to the individual attributes and the technical state of the vehicle will be this toll comprised: 1) Economic component - it cover pass of the vehicle and it acquire the resources for the reconstruction of the roads, 2) Ecological component - it cover harmful effect of emission, 3) Safetycomponent - it cover dangerous style of driving. Technical certain of the electronic toll will be comprised: 1) Modification of the periodical emission control with goal to quantification of the harmful action of the vehicle. 2) Telematic system for monitoring the track, velocity and acceleration of the individual vehicles, including the central register. 3) New original board unit (OBU) for electronic toll collection that uses the data of vehicle technical characteristics, running properties of the en Elektronické mýtné; palubní jednotka; OBU; dynamické a emisní charakteristiky vozidel; bezpečnost provozu vozidel; ITS; dopravní telematika
The influence of the car technical condition and the term of usage regarding the traffic accident creation. The basic target of the project managed by Ustav Silnicni and Mestske Dopravy Plc. has been concentrated on reaching the maximum traffic safety. The main aim has been to suggest particular provisions to increase the traffic safety based on establishing the objective influence of the technical condition regarding the traffic accident situation. As a result of this objective information the increase-safety-suggestion plan will be made out containing the particular provisions describing how to remove or decrease the influence of the incorrect car technical condition. bezpečnost technický stav	The influence of the car technical condition and the term of usage regarding the traffic accident creation. The basic target of the project managed by Ustav Silnicni and Mestske Dopravy Plc. has been concentrated on reaching the maximum traffic safety. The main aim has been to suggest particular provisions to increase the traffic safety based on establishing the objective influence of the technical condition regarding the traffic accident situation. As a result of this objective information the increase-safety-suggestion plan will be made out containing the particular provisions describing how to remove or decrease the influence of the incorrect car technical condition. bezpečnost technický stav
Passive safety of the pedestrian during collision with the vehicle, biomechanics and influence of information technologies. This project is considered to improve the safety of members of road traffic. The stressed aim of the project is the relation between pedestrian and vehicle with respect to the biomechanics and information technologies. pasivní bezpečnost; kolize chodec - vozidlo; kritéria poranění; analýza dat; informační systém; aktivní zádržné systémy	Passive safety of the pedestrian during collision with the vehicle, biomechanics and influence of information technologies. This project is considered to improve the safety of members of road traffic. The stressed aim of the project is the relation between pedestrian and vehicle with respect to the biomechanics and information technologies. pasivní bezpečnost; kolize chodec - vozidlo; kritéria poranění; analýza dat; informační systém; aktivní zádržné systémy
Information overload of traffic system and mental capacity of driver Information overload of driver's mental capacity means one of cause of driver failing in a critical traffic situation or of his inadequate traffic behaviour which causes this situation. This project assumes to examine information overload of traffic system that has been adjusted by driver during driving in its global and dynamic mod. Sources of information overload will be described as products of traffic environment, vehicles and drivers activities during driving. Parameters of mental capacity for information reception and processing will be examine also from the point of view of positive effect of purpose training. Methodology guideline will be developed with evaluated suitability and aspects of traffic safety of information overload. Informační; zátěž; Druhotná; informační; zátěž; Zdroje; informační; zátěže; Informace; relevantní; Informace; nesouvisející; řízením; Základní; úkoly; řidiče; Mentální; kapacita; řidiče; Přetížení; mentální; kapacity; Rozšíření; mentální; kapacity	Information overload of traffic system and mental capacity of driver Information overload of driver's mental capacity means one of cause of driver failing in a critical traffic situation or of his inadequate traffic behaviour which causes this situation. This project assumes to examine information overload of traffic system that has been adjusted by driver during driving in its global and dynamic mod. Sources of information overload will be described as products of traffic environment, vehicles and drivers activities during driving. Parameters of mental capacity for information reception and processing will be examine also from the point of view of positive effect of purpose training. Methodology guideline will be developed with evaluated suitability and aspects of traffic safety of information overload. Informační; zátěž; Druhotná; informační; zátěž; Zdroje; informační; zátěže; Informace; relevantní; Informace; nesouvisející; řízením; Základní; úkoly; řidiče; Mentální; kapacita; řidiče; Přetížení; mentální; kapacity; Rozšíření; mentální; kapacity
Elektronic braking system (EBS) into service - development diagnostic method and arrangement, research influence adhesive tyre performance. Diagnostic method and arrangement for verification system EBS near vehicles in traffic. Influence adhesive tyre performance on vehicle behavior at brakinng. EBS; diagnostika; EBS; zařízení; pro; diagnostiku; EBS; adheze; pneumatiky; adhezní; vlastností; pneumatik	Elektronic braking system (EBS) into service - development diagnostic method and arrangement, research influence adhesive tyre performance. Diagnostic method and arrangement for verification system EBS near vehicles in traffic. Influence adhesive tyre performance on vehicle behavior at brakinng. EBS; diagnostika; EBS; zařízení; pro; diagnostiku; EBS; adheze; pneumatiky; adhezní; vlastností; pneumatik
Decision information system in the field of road safety. Decision information system in the field of road safety. Referencing of traffic accidents to road network and design system for make a save disposal of road safety. bezpečnost; silničního; provozu; na; pozemních; komunikacích; dopravní; nehoda; nehodová; lokalita; informační; systém	Decision information system in the field of road safety. Decision information system in the field of road safety. Referencing of traffic accidents to road network and design system for make a save disposal of road safety. bezpečnost; silničního; provozu; na; pozemních; komunikacích; dopravní; nehoda; nehodová; lokalita; informační; systém
Technical regulations for designing, instalation of road traffic signals, traffic signs and road and traffic equipment on roads. The aim of the project is to elaborete set of technical regulations (guidelines) for traffic signing, traffic signals and road equipment as it is common in European matured countries and significantly contribute to road safety. Bezpečnost provozu na pozemních komunikacích; dopravní značení; signlizace; silnice	Technical regulations for designing, instalation of road traffic signals, traffic signs and road and traffic equipment on roads. The aim of the project is to elaborete set of technical regulations (guidelines) for traffic signing, traffic signals and road equipment as it is common in European matured countries and significantly contribute to road safety. Bezpečnost provozu na pozemních komunikacích; dopravní značení; signlizace; silnice
New Approach to Children Road Traffic Education As a Tool for Road Traffic Safety Improvement The project has to develop the new children road traffic safety education system for all age groups, since the newborn babies up to the age of 18. The new Road traffic Safety teaching, educating and supporting materials have to be developed, including those for teaching teachers. A part of the project will be pilot study with the new educating tools in selected region. Bezpečnost silničního provozu; výchova; vzdělávání; didaktika; didaktické materiály; děti; mládež; učení; internet	New Approach to Children Road Traffic Education As a Tool for Road Traffic Safety Improvement The project has to develop the new children road traffic safety education system for all age groups, since the newborn babies up to the age of 18. The new Road traffic Safety teaching, educating and supporting materials have to be developed, including those for teaching teachers. A part of the project will be pilot study with the new educating tools in selected region. Bezpečnost silničního provozu; výchova; vzdělávání; didaktika; didaktické materiály; děti; mládež; učení; internet
Load classification and adjustment design according NATO standard STANAG 2021 The purpose of this project is MLC load classification of every construction and lenght type of TMS bridge set according to NATO standard STANAG 2021 and necessary adjustment of bridge deck. The next goal is design or adjustment of bridge closure wall and ramp to decrease the dynamic impact of vehicles. TMS; STANAG 2021; NATO; MLC; klasifikace zatížitelnosti; zatěžovací třídy MLC; těžká mostová souprava; provizorní most	Load classification and adjustment design according NATO standard STANAG 2021 The purpose of this project is MLC load classification of every construction and lenght type of TMS bridge set according to NATO standard STANAG 2021 and necessary adjustment of bridge deck. The next goal is design or adjustment of bridge closure wall and ramp to decrease the dynamic impact of vehicles. TMS; STANAG 2021; NATO; MLC; klasifikace zatížitelnosti; zatěžovací třídy MLC; těžká mostová souprava; provizorní most
Emergency Road Sectional Bridge The purpose of this project is to develop a sectional road bridge with fast assembly, easy maintanance, low self-weight and high load capability. The bridge can be used for both civic and military applications as it will be NATO-compatible fulfilling therequirements of Czech standards, Eurocodes and also STANAGs. Ocelové mosty; silniční mosty; montované mosty; ČSN; EN; STANAG; zatímní mosty; mostní provizorium	Emergency Road Sectional Bridge The purpose of this project is to develop a sectional road bridge with fast assembly, easy maintanance, low self-weight and high load capability. The bridge can be used for both civic and military applications as it will be NATO-compatible fulfilling therequirements of Czech standards, Eurocodes and also STANAGs. Ocelové mosty; silniční mosty; montované mosty; ČSN; EN; STANAG; zatímní mosty; mostní provizorium
Research of the roads with increased dynamical response of the vehicles and development of their degradation produced by the kinematical and impulse loadings. The project is based on the latest achievements of basic research in the field of interaction vehicle - road - gravity. The interaction approach is at present developed in all states with advanced transport technology. The original Czech diagnostic system DYNVIA enables the evaluation of the traffic route from the point of view of kinematical and impulse inputs to the loading of vehicles. At the same time, based on the interaction system coupling, using the parametric identification, the dynamic frequency transfer will be estimated for a typical representative of vehicles TIR, which above all load and gradually degrade pavement of traffic routes. The result of the project will consist in the relevant methodology and proposal for amendments to the standards for the assessment of the pavement quality from the point of view of the influence of short and long wave lengths on the degradation of surfacing or of the whole pavement, respectively. Dynamické interakce vozidlo - vozovka - gravitace; výkonová spektrální hustota nerovností; krátké a dlouhé vlny nerovností; frekvenční dynamický přenos vozidel; klouzavý rozptyl; úseky zvýšené dynamické odezvy; degradace povrchových krytů a celých konstr	Research of the roads with increased dynamical response of the vehicles and development of their degradation produced by the kinematical and impulse loadings. The project is based on the latest achievements of basic research in the field of interaction vehicle - road - gravity. The interaction approach is at present developed in all states with advanced transport technology. The original Czech diagnostic system DYNVIA enables the evaluation of the traffic route from the point of view of kinematical and impulse inputs to the loading of vehicles. At the same time, based on the interaction system coupling, using the parametric identification, the dynamic frequency transfer will be estimated for a typical representative of vehicles TIR, which above all load and gradually degrade pavement of traffic routes. The result of the project will consist in the relevant methodology and proposal for amendments to the standards for the assessment of the pavement quality from the point of view of the influence of short and long wave lengths on the degradation of surfacing or of the whole pavement, respectively. Dynamické interakce vozidlo - vozovka - gravitace; výkonová spektrální hustota nerovností; krátké a dlouhé vlny nerovností; frekvenční dynamický přenos vozidel; klouzavý rozptyl; úseky zvýšené dynamické odezvy; degradace povrchových krytů a celých konstr
Method and accuracy of determining uninterrupted intesity of automobile traffic based on short-term measurements. One of the basic traffic-engineering characteristics of the overland communications is the traffic intensity on these communications. For designing of the traffic construction parameters, it is very important to know the level of the uninterrupted load of the road by the particular vehicle types. In the common traffic-engineering practice, including the nation-wide traffic count, the count is not normally run over the full 24 hours, but only the "time probes" are included in the count. The way of setting the short-term measurements of the uninterrupted traffic (usually through the use of recounting coefficients) is not specifically and exactly identified and everyone sets it down as needed. The currently used coefficients do not always reflect the actual traffic intensity in the communication infrastructure. The uninterrupted intensities determined through this method, may vary from the actual intensities even by tens of percent. The objective of this project is to find out the actual needs of those w intenzita dopravy; dopravní průzkumy; roční průměr denních intenzit; sčítání dopravy	Method and accuracy of determining uninterrupted intesity of automobile traffic based on short-term measurements. One of the basic traffic-engineering characteristics of the overland communications is the traffic intensity on these communications. For designing of the traffic construction parameters, it is very important to know the level of the uninterrupted load of the road by the particular vehicle types. In the common traffic-engineering practice, including the nation-wide traffic count, the count is not normally run over the full 24 hours, but only the "time probes" are included in the count. The way of setting the short-term measurements of the uninterrupted traffic (usually through the use of recounting coefficients) is not specifically and exactly identified and everyone sets it down as needed. The currently used coefficients do not always reflect the actual traffic intensity in the communication infrastructure. The uninterrupted intensities determined through this method, may vary from the actual intensities even by tens of percent. The objective of this project is to find out the actual needs of those w intenzita dopravy; dopravní průzkumy; roční průměr denních intenzit; sčítání dopravy
Self-compacting concrete in bridge structures Self-compacting concrete starts to be used in structures in the Czech Republic. The project will support its legal extensive application for bridges. The research activities will be focused on the specific problems including design of the concrete mix, where the local constituents will be used, the evaluation of the testing methods for concrete in the fresh and hardened state, the production of an experimental precast and prestressed concrete beam and its application in a selected real bridge. Finally the experience will be summarized in a document called Technical specifications. The document will be written in a form of guidelines for those who would like to use self-compacting concrete for bridges. The research team has a good experience with similar projects and activities and also has the necessary equipment available. The partners in the research team are able to produce the beams and assemble it into an experimental bridge structure. The structure will be monitored and the conclusions will be e návrh betonové směsi; experimentální most; předpjatý nosník; samozhutnitelný beton; zkoušky betonu	Self-compacting concrete in bridge structures Self-compacting concrete starts to be used in structures in the Czech Republic. The project will support its legal extensive application for bridges. The research activities will be focused on the specific problems including design of the concrete mix, where the local constituents will be used, the evaluation of the testing methods for concrete in the fresh and hardened state, the production of an experimental precast and prestressed concrete beam and its application in a selected real bridge. Finally the experience will be summarized in a document called Technical specifications. The document will be written in a form of guidelines for those who would like to use self-compacting concrete for bridges. The research team has a good experience with similar projects and activities and also has the necessary equipment available. The partners in the research team are able to produce the beams and assemble it into an experimental bridge structure. The structure will be monitored and the conclusions will be e návrh betonové směsi; experimentální most; předpjatý nosník; samozhutnitelný beton; zkoušky betonu
Method of Measurement of Reinforcement Embedded Steel Corrosion Rate The well-known and usually adapted potential mapping technique measuring half-cell potentials on concrete surface leads to some misinterpretation especially in structures placed in wet environment. In order to avoid these problems additional polarizationtechnique can be used. The method of polarization resistance measurement called galvanostatic pulse technique is usable in field conditions such as concrete bridge decks. The results of these measurements can be performed,when the half-cell potential aredifficult to interpret. For good practical exploitation get past detailed investigation of factors that have can results distorted and suggest of steps, that would distortion of results in comparison with real state eliminate or reduce. beton; koroze ocelové výztuže; provozní měření; limeární polarizace; galvanostatická pulsní technika	Method of Measurement of Reinforcement Embedded Steel Corrosion Rate The well-known and usually adapted potential mapping technique measuring half-cell potentials on concrete surface leads to some misinterpretation especially in structures placed in wet environment. In order to avoid these problems additional polarizationtechnique can be used. The method of polarization resistance measurement called galvanostatic pulse technique is usable in field conditions such as concrete bridge decks. The results of these measurements can be performed,when the half-cell potential aredifficult to interpret. For good practical exploitation get past detailed investigation of factors that have can results distorted and suggest of steps, that would distortion of results in comparison with real state eliminate or reduce. beton; koroze ocelové výztuže; provozní měření; limeární polarizace; galvanostatická pulsní technika
Geosynthetics and ligtweight materials in highway embankments Design of soil reinforcement on highways in Czech Republic is mostly provided by geosynthetics manufacturers or agents. Result of such practice is highly overdesigned construction. SG Geotechnika will mesure the tensile stress in reinforcement on selected constructions and will compare the results with predictions. CDV will realise large scale tests with reinforced pavement construction layers on soft soils. The result of the project will be a manual for design of reiforced soil structures. Lightweightmaterials in embankments positively influence settlement and reduce earth pressures on retaining structures. There is no manual so far for design and execution of such structures. SG Geotechnika will monitor behaviour of embankments of polysterene (D1)andlightweight ceramic aggregates-Liapor (D8, I/6. The results of measurements will be compared with numerical methods and validity of calculation methods will be checked. zemní práce; násypy; opěrné konstrukce; geosyntetika; konstrukční vrstva; měkké podloží; lehké keramické kamenivo; polystyren; popílek; sedání	Geosynthetics and ligtweight materials in highway embankments Design of soil reinforcement on highways in Czech Republic is mostly provided by geosynthetics manufacturers or agents. Result of such practice is highly overdesigned construction. SG Geotechnika will mesure the tensile stress in reinforcement on selected constructions and will compare the results with predictions. CDV will realise large scale tests with reinforced pavement construction layers on soft soils. The result of the project will be a manual for design of reiforced soil structures. Lightweightmaterials in embankments positively influence settlement and reduce earth pressures on retaining structures. There is no manual so far for design and execution of such structures. SG Geotechnika will monitor behaviour of embankments of polysterene (D1)andlightweight ceramic aggregates-Liapor (D8, I/6. The results of measurements will be compared with numerical methods and validity of calculation methods will be checked. zemní práce; násypy; opěrné konstrukce; geosyntetika; konstrukční vrstva; měkké podloží; lehké keramické kamenivo; polystyren; popílek; sedání
Skid resistance od road surface characteristics according to European standard for traffic safety increase Research project is oriented on the measurement and calibration of road skid resistance characteristics according to European standards and test devices. During the project solution reference test section will be established. The result of project w surface for calibration and novelization od CSN 73 6177. Measurement and evaluation of pavement antiskid characterics. The project results will be incorporated into Ministry of trnsport recommendation and into National annex of EN Road building materials protismykové vlatnosti; vozovky; měření; hodnocení; kalibrace	Skid resistance od road surface characteristics according to European standard for traffic safety increase Research project is oriented on the measurement and calibration of road skid resistance characteristics according to European standards and test devices. During the project solution reference test section will be established. The result of project w surface for calibration and novelization od CSN 73 6177. Measurement and evaluation of pavement antiskid characterics. The project results will be incorporated into Ministry of trnsport recommendation and into National annex of EN Road building materials protismykové vlatnosti; vozovky; měření; hodnocení; kalibrace
Introduction of European standards concerning the material specifications for improvement of the road serviceability, life time and traffic safety. The goal of the project is to introduce new fundamental test of flexible pavement materials according to the European standards and to link the fundamental and empirical parameters. netuhá vozovka; materiály vozovek; funkční zkoušky; empirické zkoušky; Evropské normy; národní dodatek	Introduction of European standards concerning the material specifications for improvement of the road serviceability, life time and traffic safety. The goal of the project is to introduce new fundamental test of flexible pavement materials according to the European standards and to link the fundamental and empirical parameters. netuhá vozovka; materiály vozovek; funkční zkoušky; empirické zkoušky; Evropské normy; národní dodatek
Assessment of repair and reconstruction of motorway and highway concrete bridges finished since 1990 in Czech Republic, identification of alkali - silica reaction products and their sources in concrete. Since 1990 many bridge repairs and reconstruction have been finished. This reconstruction includes many new technological processes and methods and new materials which were not used before. There were no regulations and codes for, and experience with thedesign and usage in the nineties. It is therefore necessary to assess bridge repairs. Methods and materials will be inspected and conclusions will be presented. If there is a need for diagnosis it will be done. This research will be based on: - Reviewofinternational and Czech literature, - Inspections of approximately 50 bridges - Diagnosis, if necessary. New rules for repairs will be suggested, and also methods for prediction of durability will be presented. Special problem of concrete bridges is therisk of alkali-silica reaction of aggregates. There had been no experience with this serious problem in the Czech Republic before the nineties. It is important to point at main typical characteristics and features for the next inspections to re Mosty; beton; horniny; minerály; opravy; rekonstrukce; alkalická reakce kameniva; životnost; prohlídky mostů; závady; degradace betonu; diagnostické průzkumy konstrukcí; křemen; deformace a rekrystalizace; optická a elektronová mikroskopie; rtg. difrakce	Assessment of repair and reconstruction of motorway and highway concrete bridges finished since 1990 in Czech Republic, identification of alkali - silica reaction products and their sources in concrete. Since 1990 many bridge repairs and reconstruction have been finished. This reconstruction includes many new technological processes and methods and new materials which were not used before. There were no regulations and codes for, and experience with thedesign and usage in the nineties. It is therefore necessary to assess bridge repairs. Methods and materials will be inspected and conclusions will be presented. If there is a need for diagnosis it will be done. This research will be based on: - Reviewofinternational and Czech literature, - Inspections of approximately 50 bridges - Diagnosis, if necessary. New rules for repairs will be suggested, and also methods for prediction of durability will be presented. Special problem of concrete bridges is therisk of alkali-silica reaction of aggregates. There had been no experience with this serious problem in the Czech Republic before the nineties. It is important to point at main typical characteristics and features for the next inspections to re Mosty; beton; horniny; minerály; opravy; rekonstrukce; alkalická reakce kameniva; životnost; prohlídky mostů; závady; degradace betonu; diagnostické průzkumy konstrukcí; křemen; deformace a rekrystalizace; optická a elektronová mikroskopie; rtg. difrakce
Development of methods of the design of new highway bridges and verification of operation properties and life-time of the existing ones, with respect to the stochastic character of material, loading and response parameters. The research project meets the requirement of minimizing the necessity of maintenance and repairs of highway bridges, which always causes the economic losses and unpleasant restrictions of traffic on highways. The project is focused to concrete and prestressed structures; it includes the selection of several highway bridges, which will be investigated with respect to their loading, stresses, material degradation and function of important details (draining, closure), and assessed as to their long term operation capacity. The project will result in recommendations for the design of new highway bridges and for the reconstruction of the old ones, in order to assure their longer life-time by respectiong most of the sensitive points and the risk in general. Betonové dálniční mosty; projektování mostů; životnost mostů; závady na mostech; provozní spolehlivost mostů	Development of methods of the design of new highway bridges and verification of operation properties and life-time of the existing ones, with respect to the stochastic character of material, loading and response parameters. The research project meets the requirement of minimizing the necessity of maintenance and repairs of highway bridges, which always causes the economic losses and unpleasant restrictions of traffic on highways. The project is focused to concrete and prestressed structures; it includes the selection of several highway bridges, which will be investigated with respect to their loading, stresses, material degradation and function of important details (draining, closure), and assessed as to their long term operation capacity. The project will result in recommendations for the design of new highway bridges and for the reconstruction of the old ones, in order to assure their longer life-time by respectiong most of the sensitive points and the risk in general. Betonové dálniční mosty; projektování mostů; životnost mostů; závady na mostech; provozní spolehlivost mostů
Response of bridges to thermal and traffic actions Longterm experimental investigation of the thermal and traffic action response on 3 bridges with various types of the cross section. Assessment of temperature gradient on these types of bridge structures. Processing results of experimental investigationsof the bridge structure response with the goal of correcting the Nationally Determined Parameters in National Annexes EN 1991-1-5 Thermal actions and EN 1991-2 Traffic loads on bridges. Assessment of the response level arising from the traffic actions and the comparison with the response level calculated according to eurocode EN 1991-2. zatížení dopravou; zatížení teplotou; monitorování dopravy; měření odezvy; eurokódy	Response of bridges to thermal and traffic actions Longterm experimental investigation of the thermal and traffic action response on 3 bridges with various types of the cross section. Assessment of temperature gradient on these types of bridge structures. Processing results of experimental investigationsof the bridge structure response with the goal of correcting the Nationally Determined Parameters in National Annexes EN 1991-1-5 Thermal actions and EN 1991-2 Traffic loads on bridges. Assessment of the response level arising from the traffic actions and the comparison with the response level calculated according to eurocode EN 1991-2. zatížení dopravou; zatížení teplotou; monitorování dopravy; měření odezvy; eurokódy
Analysis of causes and proposal of precautions of excessive deflections growth in long-span prestressed concrete bridges. At existing prestressed long-span bridge structures excessive long-term deflections rise up. Research project analyses causes of their origin and proposes precautions for their elimination. Betonový most; předpjatá konstrukce; nadměrné průhyby; preventivní opatření; reologické charakteristiky	Analysis of causes and proposal of precautions of excessive deflections growth in long-span prestressed concrete bridges. At existing prestressed long-span bridge structures excessive long-term deflections rise up. Research project analyses causes of their origin and proposes precautions for their elimination. Betonový most; předpjatá konstrukce; nadměrné průhyby; preventivní opatření; reologické charakteristiky
Conception of a freight village network in the Czech Republic in relation to intensification of intermodal freight transport The first task of the Study is gathering and assessment of information of existing or planning foreign freight villages. Based on these data, a model of function of freight villages and related transport network will be proposed. An important part will be use of combined transport. The second part of the Study will contain a proposal of Freight village network, based mainly on analysis of existing good flows. Third part of the Study will be focused on solving of related issues as is form of ownership, financing, partnership of private and public sector, legal framework etc. The integral part of the Study should be analysis of a potential demand for services of freight village. veřejné; logistické; centrum; logistika; kombinovaná; doprava; intermodální; doprava; citylogistika; PPP (public privat partnership)	Conception of a freight village network in the Czech Republic in relation to intensification of intermodal freight transport The first task of the Study is gathering and assessment of information of existing or planning foreign freight villages. Based on these data, a model of function of freight villages and related transport network will be proposed. An important part will be use of combined transport. The second part of the Study will contain a proposal of Freight village network, based mainly on analysis of existing good flows. Third part of the Study will be focused on solving of related issues as is form of ownership, financing, partnership of private and public sector, legal framework etc. The integral part of the Study should be analysis of a potential demand for services of freight village. veřejné; logistické; centrum; logistika; kombinovaná; doprava; intermodální; doprava; citylogistika; PPP (public privat partnership)
Traffic and economic modeling of Toll-road system, based on the "Traffic model of Czech Republic and connecting European network" focused on the pricing and its extent. The project shall analyze the extent and influence of tolling system on roads for different categories of cars after the tolling implementation, with the use of modern traffic simulation tools and Transport Model of Czech Republic, covering also the central European area. The aim is to find optimal charging for EFC in the consequencies of maximal benefit and minimisation of adverse effect of tolling EFC; Zpoplatn&#283; ní infrastruktury; modelování dopravy	Traffic and economic modeling of Toll-road system, based on the "Traffic model of Czech Republic and connecting European network" focused on the pricing and its extent. The project shall analyze the extent and influence of tolling system on roads for different categories of cars after the tolling implementation, with the use of modern traffic simulation tools and Transport Model of Czech Republic, covering also the central European area. The aim is to find optimal charging for EFC in the consequencies of maximal benefit and minimisation of adverse effect of tolling EFC; Zpoplatn&#283; ní infrastruktury; modelování dopravy
Information support for blind people. Develop acoustic information system for blind and purblind people that would on basis actual location end target was able through mobile equipment navigate blind men to the destination. bezpečnost dopravy; podpora hendikepovaným; navigační systémy	Information support for blind people. Develop acoustic information system for blind and purblind people that would on basis actual location end target was able through mobile equipment navigate blind men to the destination. bezpečnost dopravy; podpora hendikepovaným; navigační systémy
Methodology for elaborating action plans for the neighbourhood of major roads, major railways and major airports The objective of the project is to create methodology for elaborating action plans that will manage the annoying and harmful noise effects in the specified areas and will determine procedures for noise reduction. The solution will start from strategic noise maps for major roads, major railways and major airports. The solution will include the design of measures for noise reduction in places, where limit values of noise indicators will be exceeded, in the frame of the feasibility study in a selected region. Action plans will enable to estimate the reduction of the number of people living in dwellings that are exposed to the increased values of noise levels. The day-evening-night noise indicator Lden [dB] and the night-time noise indicator Lnight [dB] will be used for estimating the number of inhabitants living in dwellings that are exposed to noise 4 m above the ground on the most exposed facade. Action plans elaborated according to the methodology, which will be created and verified in this proje Hluk; zdraví; akční plány; strategické hlukové mapování; GIS	Methodology for elaborating action plans for the neighbourhood of major roads, major railways and major airports The objective of the project is to create methodology for elaborating action plans that will manage the annoying and harmful noise effects in the specified areas and will determine procedures for noise reduction. The solution will start from strategic noise maps for major roads, major railways and major airports. The solution will include the design of measures for noise reduction in places, where limit values of noise indicators will be exceeded, in the frame of the feasibility study in a selected region. Action plans will enable to estimate the reduction of the number of people living in dwellings that are exposed to the increased values of noise levels. The day-evening-night noise indicator Lden [dB] and the night-time noise indicator Lnight [dB] will be used for estimating the number of inhabitants living in dwellings that are exposed to noise 4 m above the ground on the most exposed facade. Action plans elaborated according to the methodology, which will be created and verified in this proje Hluk; zdraví; akční plány; strategické hlukové mapování; GIS
Evaluation of road asset management system - pilot project The project will be focused on the checking of results of the research and development project Road Asset Management and the final part of the project -- Technical Guideline for Road Asset Management. The Technical Guideline is proposed to be used fortheeconomical assessment of the road development and modernization. Silniční síť; systém hospodaření; prognóza dopravy; nehodovost; vliv dopravy na životní prostředí; ekonomické hodnocení	Evaluation of road asset management system - pilot project The project will be focused on the checking of results of the research and development project Road Asset Management and the final part of the project -- Technical Guideline for Road Asset Management. The Technical Guideline is proposed to be used fortheeconomical assessment of the road development and modernization. Silniční síť; systém hospodaření; prognóza dopravy; nehodovost; vliv dopravy na životní prostředí; ekonomické hodnocení
Methodology of Passability Parameters to Construct of Substructure on the Tracks of Trans European Conventional Rail System The rules for determination of load-bearing capacity of sleeper subsoil will be generalize on the basis of practical tests in dependence on methodology of measurement used by railways authorities in EU. Within the TSI (technical specification for interoperability) will be determined some design elements for passability parameters of railway tracks for running of wagons with higher axle load. Modul přetvárnosti; konstrukční vrstva; kolejnice; pražec; nápravové zatížení; kolové zatížení	Methodology of Passability Parameters to Construct of Substructure on the Tracks of Trans European Conventional Rail System The rules for determination of load-bearing capacity of sleeper subsoil will be generalize on the basis of practical tests in dependence on methodology of measurement used by railways authorities in EU. Within the TSI (technical specification for interoperability) will be determined some design elements for passability parameters of railway tracks for running of wagons with higher axle load. Modul přetvárnosti; konstrukční vrstva; kolejnice; pražec; nápravové zatížení; kolové zatížení
The capacity of roundabouts. The aim of the proposed project is to analyze the currently used methods for calculating capacity of the roundabouts. The project will analyze the methods used in the Czech Republic as well as the methods used in other EU countries, or if necessary alsothose used in other countries. Through the research, it will be necessary to verify the input presumptions of the currently used methods. Based on the analysis of the theoretical bases of already used methods together with the use of statistical-stochastic analysis of the data obtained from the research, we will try to propose adjustments to the existing and currently used methods, or we will design and propose an absolutely new method. dopravní inženýrství; kapacita křižovatek; dopravní průzkum; výpočtové metody; okružní křižovatky	The capacity of roundabouts. The aim of the proposed project is to analyze the currently used methods for calculating capacity of the roundabouts. The project will analyze the methods used in the Czech Republic as well as the methods used in other EU countries, or if necessary alsothose used in other countries. Through the research, it will be necessary to verify the input presumptions of the currently used methods. Based on the analysis of the theoretical bases of already used methods together with the use of statistical-stochastic analysis of the data obtained from the research, we will try to propose adjustments to the existing and currently used methods, or we will design and propose an absolutely new method. dopravní inženýrství; kapacita křižovatek; dopravní průzkum; výpočtové metody; okružní křižovatky
The exact prediction of pavement lifetime. The influence of total weigh, axle loads and vehicle speed measuring without the traffic restriction on the pavements and bridges preservation. Links to the inteligent highway systems´ introduction. Development of new system for weighting in motion without any restriction for transport stream. Using meassured data for other statistical handling. Harmonisation with similar EU projects. vozovka; povrch; životnost; poškození; stopa; koleje; wim; nápravový; kolový; tlak; dynamické; síly; nákladní; vozidlo	The exact prediction of pavement lifetime. The influence of total weigh, axle loads and vehicle speed measuring without the traffic restriction on the pavements and bridges preservation. Links to the inteligent highway systems´ introduction. Development of new system for weighting in motion without any restriction for transport stream. Using meassured data for other statistical handling. Harmonisation with similar EU projects. vozovka; povrch; životnost; poškození; stopa; koleje; wim; nápravový; kolový; tlak; dynamické; síly; nákladní; vozidlo
Management system for forwarding companies to achieve higher economy effectivens of their operation. The research task brings fundamental results in the area of possible implementation of management system for forwarding companies to achieve higher economy effectivens of their operation what will appear in following concrete areas: -reduce of total vehicle distances -increase of competitivenss of forwarding companies -reduce roads loading and wear -higher fraffic fluency -information benefit for electronic toll collection purposes vozidlo; GSM; GPRS; GPS; CAN; optimalizace, efektivnost, kontrola; přestupek; systém; databáze; přenos dat; doprava; nehoda; silniční provoz; dispečink; chování; provoz; konkurenceschopnost; zátěž; vozovka; životní prostředí; kolona; nehodovost; elektron	Management system for forwarding companies to achieve higher economy effectivens of their operation. The research task brings fundamental results in the area of possible implementation of management system for forwarding companies to achieve higher economy effectivens of their operation what will appear in following concrete areas: -reduce of total vehicle distances -increase of competitivenss of forwarding companies -reduce roads loading and wear -higher fraffic fluency -information benefit for electronic toll collection purposes vozidlo; GSM; GPRS; GPS; CAN; optimalizace, efektivnost, kontrola; přestupek; systém; databáze; přenos dat; doprava; nehoda; silniční provoz; dispečink; chování; provoz; konkurenceschopnost; zátěž; vozovka; životní prostředí; kolona; nehodovost; elektron
Optimizing freight transport streams with respect to necessary scope of transport infrastructure upon establishing network of public logistic centers offering logistic cervices This project proposes a new technology of serving freight transport needs using a new network of public logistic centers offering logistic, newly developed using mathematical optimizing methods (for designing the network) and utilizing a huge support ofother modern information technologies. The project includes working technologies and techniques for a logistic carrier, and detailed analysis and implementation of a comprehensive information system supporting the named activities. The application coverscollecting primary data, its analysis, mathematical optimizing algorithms and utilizing in the controlling processes of the logistic center. Goals of the project include also improving the role of the railway as an economic, ecologic, and high-capacitybackbone transport. železnice; nákladní doprava; logistika; svoz a rozvoz; informační systém; optimalizace	Optimizing freight transport streams with respect to necessary scope of transport infrastructure upon establishing network of public logistic centers offering logistic cervices This project proposes a new technology of serving freight transport needs using a new network of public logistic centers offering logistic, newly developed using mathematical optimizing methods (for designing the network) and utilizing a huge support ofother modern information technologies. The project includes working technologies and techniques for a logistic carrier, and detailed analysis and implementation of a comprehensive information system supporting the named activities. The application coverscollecting primary data, its analysis, mathematical optimizing algorithms and utilizing in the controlling processes of the logistic center. Goals of the project include also improving the role of the railway as an economic, ecologic, and high-capacitybackbone transport. železnice; nákladní doprava; logistika; svoz a rozvoz; informační systém; optimalizace
Schemes of fundamental applications of logistic systems into freight service transport in stated regions and assurance of its optimum functionality. The project solves service system of regional and nationwide transport network with utilization of logistic systems mainly in combined transport road/railway on the basis of detailed analysis and choice of suitable commodities for railway freight transport. Part of this project is also the scheme of centres for part-load consignment processing and the scheme for optimum number of formation yards. logistické systémy; kusová zásilka; vozová zásilka; technologické procesy; železniční přeprava; dopravní síť	Schemes of fundamental applications of logistic systems into freight service transport in stated regions and assurance of its optimum functionality. The project solves service system of regional and nationwide transport network with utilization of logistic systems mainly in combined transport road/railway on the basis of detailed analysis and choice of suitable commodities for railway freight transport. Part of this project is also the scheme of centres for part-load consignment processing and the scheme for optimum number of formation yards. logistické systémy; kusová zásilka; vozová zásilka; technologické procesy; železniční přeprava; dopravní síť
Integrated transport system and the National Information System of the public line passenger transport timetables as instruments for securing of optimal transport operating services in regions Main idea of the research is the elaboration of model acting during the realization of demands for working and controlling of integrated transport systems including setting-up of standard final behavior of integrated transport system. Integrovaný dopravní systém; IDS; koordinátor IDS; tarifní systém; odbavovací systém; informační systém; dopravní síť	Integrated transport system and the National Information System of the public line passenger transport timetables as instruments for securing of optimal transport operating services in regions Main idea of the research is the elaboration of model acting during the realization of demands for working and controlling of integrated transport systems including setting-up of standard final behavior of integrated transport system. Integrovaný dopravní systém; IDS; koordinátor IDS; tarifní systém; odbavovací systém; informační systém; dopravní síť
DC Circuit Breaker Coupling At present time the two or four wires in a metallic cables are used for coupling of DC circuit breakers. Using of metallic cables is problematic because inductive influence of the traction current and stray current can influence the transmitted signals between mutualy bind circuit breakers. The ideal solution to this problem is using an optical cables because this cable is not influenced. This technology needs to use a proper transmission equipment. In case of using IP and Ethernet protocols in accordance to obtain in pseudoreal time the guaranted quality of service have to be used. In accordance to save the system against unauthorized persons activity a virtual private network have to be used. vazba napáječů; MPLS; QoS	DC Circuit Breaker Coupling At present time the two or four wires in a metallic cables are used for coupling of DC circuit breakers. Using of metallic cables is problematic because inductive influence of the traction current and stray current can influence the transmitted signals between mutualy bind circuit breakers. The ideal solution to this problem is using an optical cables because this cable is not influenced. This technology needs to use a proper transmission equipment. In case of using IP and Ethernet protocols in accordance to obtain in pseudoreal time the guaranted quality of service have to be used. In accordance to save the system against unauthorized persons activity a virtual private network have to be used. vazba napáječů; MPLS; QoS
Information system for the Ministry of Transport on technical regulations concerning obligatory technical requirements to road vehicles The Czech legislative for approval of road vehicles for road transport is based on the application of international technical regulations of the UN Economic Council for Europe and EU European Union. For the legislative, testing and design activities in the Czech Republic it is necessary not only to translate the original documents in Czech, but to create "consolidated" versions as well, where all the amending documents are integrated into the "basic" documents. The consolidated Czech versions of international documents are than presented in the form of electronic library on the Internet web. Schvalování silničních vozidel; silniční provoz; technické předpisy; mezinárodně platné technické předpisy; Evropská hospodářská komise OSN; Evropské společenství EU; konsolidovaná verze; základní dokument; dokument změnový; elektronická knihovna; www st	Information system for the Ministry of Transport on technical regulations concerning obligatory technical requirements to road vehicles The Czech legislative for approval of road vehicles for road transport is based on the application of international technical regulations of the UN Economic Council for Europe and EU European Union. For the legislative, testing and design activities in the Czech Republic it is necessary not only to translate the original documents in Czech, but to create "consolidated" versions as well, where all the amending documents are integrated into the "basic" documents. The consolidated Czech versions of international documents are than presented in the form of electronic library on the Internet web. Schvalování silničních vozidel; silniční provoz; technické předpisy; mezinárodně platné technické předpisy; Evropská hospodářská komise OSN; Evropské společenství EU; konsolidovaná verze; základní dokument; dokument změnový; elektronická knihovna; www st
System facilities, disposals and mechanisms for right projecting and realization of accessible environment in a traffic network of public transport This project is specialized in application previous findings about mobility of persons with disabilities into the software medium to support decision-making in the formation accessible environments in the public transport and in the conecting systems. veřejná osobní doprava; bezbariérovost; osoby s omezenou schopností pohybu a orientace; státní správa; legislativa; rozhodovací proces; přístupnost pro všechny	System facilities, disposals and mechanisms for right projecting and realization of accessible environment in a traffic network of public transport This project is specialized in application previous findings about mobility of persons with disabilities into the software medium to support decision-making in the formation accessible environments in the public transport and in the conecting systems. veřejná osobní doprava; bezbariérovost; osoby s omezenou schopností pohybu a orientace; státní správa; legislativa; rozhodovací proces; přístupnost pro všechny
Comparison of public transport service for municipalities in the Czech Republic and setting up the standards of basic transport service. The project looks about a current level of public transport service and defines current standards applied in this area. dopravní obslužnost; standardy	Comparison of public transport service for municipalities in the Czech Republic and setting up the standards of basic transport service. The project looks about a current level of public transport service and defines current standards applied in this area. dopravní obslužnost; standardy
Integrated transport systems - information systems supporting the decision making process in public authorities as regards construction and operation of ITS in the CR. Setting up a standard environment in the area of collection, processing and storing transport data related to integrated information systems on the territory of the Czech Republic. Setting up standards for the development of information systems supporting the operation of integrated transport systems. Integrované dopravní systémy; informační systémy; standardizace dopravních dat	Integrated transport systems - information systems supporting the decision making process in public authorities as regards construction and operation of ITS in the CR. Setting up a standard environment in the area of collection, processing and storing transport data related to integrated information systems on the territory of the Czech Republic. Setting up standards for the development of information systems supporting the operation of integrated transport systems. Integrované dopravní systémy; informační systémy; standardizace dopravních dat
Using position of transport vehicle to solve the problems of transport services. The main goal of this project is use data about position of public transport vehicles. In this project will be done analyse of current status of transport telematics system to use this analyse in architecture of new system for support of public transport. Lokalizace polohy; dopravní telematika; ITS; analýza; potřeby uživatelů; systémové požadavky; bezpečnost; dostupnost; spolehlivost; integrita; přesnost určení polohy; logická a informační architektura; procesní a funkční model; systémový model; datový re	Using position of transport vehicle to solve the problems of transport services. The main goal of this project is use data about position of public transport vehicles. In this project will be done analyse of current status of transport telematics system to use this analyse in architecture of new system for support of public transport. Lokalizace polohy; dopravní telematika; ITS; analýza; potřeby uživatelů; systémové požadavky; bezpečnost; dostupnost; spolehlivost; integrita; přesnost určení polohy; logická a informační architektura; procesní a funkční model; systémový model; datový re
Research of optimal methods of air pollution from automobile traffic modeling and support of its results field usage The aim of the project is reducing the effects of automobile traffic on the air quality. Project will allow gaining detailed information of emissions and air pollution caused by automobiles. It will provide tool for their estimation with the close relation to individual area conditions, expected trends and different scenarios of problem solutions. Within the project, problems of current methods used for emission and air quality estimation will be identified. Consecutively unification and refine of thesemethods will be suggested. Part of the project will be aimed on the question of refine and supplement of air quality modelling input data, with the aim of removing the incommensurability of data inputs. In the domain of air pollutants dispersion modelling, the project is aimed mainly at the proposal of optimal computing methods, mainly in the relation to the assessment scale, dynamics of the terrain. Project will try to find suitable methods that can be used in local, topical or regional scale. Appl emise; imise; GIS; matematické modelování	Research of optimal methods of air pollution from automobile traffic modeling and support of its results field usage The aim of the project is reducing the effects of automobile traffic on the air quality. Project will allow gaining detailed information of emissions and air pollution caused by automobiles. It will provide tool for their estimation with the close relation to individual area conditions, expected trends and different scenarios of problem solutions. Within the project, problems of current methods used for emission and air quality estimation will be identified. Consecutively unification and refine of thesemethods will be suggested. Part of the project will be aimed on the question of refine and supplement of air quality modelling input data, with the aim of removing the incommensurability of data inputs. In the domain of air pollutants dispersion modelling, the project is aimed mainly at the proposal of optimal computing methods, mainly in the relation to the assessment scale, dynamics of the terrain. Project will try to find suitable methods that can be used in local, topical or regional scale. Appl emise; imise; GIS; matematické modelování
Conditions for acceptance of regulation precautions, which with behind critical situation changes way operating and organization of transport in CR and conditions for limitation or closure running of transport in CR behind critical situations. Project solve conditions for receiving regulation precaution, which with behind critical situation changes way operating and organization transport and for receiving of procurations, which they can limit or order running on given section in transport.Effect of project is submission amended of existing enactment in Czech Republic and content implementing regulations bear on adoption of critical regulation procuration in transport, inclusive the juridical acts of European union. Choice set data and procedures will implement into current document emergency plan on ministry of transport. krizové řízení; krizový stav; letecká doprava; regulační opatření; silniční doprava; vodní doprava; zabezpečení hostitelským státem; železniční doprava	Conditions for acceptance of regulation precautions, which with behind critical situation changes way operating and organization of transport in CR and conditions for limitation or closure running of transport in CR behind critical situations. Project solve conditions for receiving regulation precaution, which with behind critical situation changes way operating and organization transport and for receiving of procurations, which they can limit or order running on given section in transport.Effect of project is submission amended of existing enactment in Czech Republic and content implementing regulations bear on adoption of critical regulation procuration in transport, inclusive the juridical acts of European union. Choice set data and procedures will implement into current document emergency plan on ministry of transport. krizové řízení; krizový stav; letecká doprava; regulační opatření; silniční doprava; vodní doprava; zabezpečení hostitelským státem; železniční doprava
Transport and Marketing Surway The project goal is the preparation and practical testing of transport and marketing surway with help of information from active telecommunication components like mobile phones using the new detector technology. dopravní a marketinkové průzkumy; dopravní detektor; ITS	Transport and Marketing Surway The project goal is the preparation and practical testing of transport and marketing surway with help of information from active telecommunication components like mobile phones using the new detector technology. dopravní a marketinkové průzkumy; dopravní detektor; ITS
Verification and imlementation of uniform metodology and technics for accurate localization of traffic accidents in the its place as a part of the information system for public service and police. Projest follows up the increase of road safety by practical inplementation of the project INFOBESI as follows: 1. accurate localization of traffic accidents in the its place as a part of the information system for public service and police 2. Automatization of the proces of developing coutermeasures in blackspots according to the metodology from the project INFOBESI. bezpečnost; silničního; provozu; na; pozemních; komunikacích; dopravní; nehoda; nehodová; lokalita; informační; systém	Verification and imlementation of uniform metodology and technics for accurate localization of traffic accidents in the its place as a part of the information system for public service and police. Projest follows up the increase of road safety by practical inplementation of the project INFOBESI as follows: 1. accurate localization of traffic accidents in the its place as a part of the information system for public service and police 2. Automatization of the proces of developing coutermeasures in blackspots according to the metodology from the project INFOBESI. bezpečnost; silničního; provozu; na; pozemních; komunikacích; dopravní; nehoda; nehodová; lokalita; informační; systém
Automated traffic enforcement system. Project is focused on a very sensitive issue increasing transport safety and traffic work and law enforcement. The objective of the project is to develop automated traffic enforcement system along with designing database of driving offence and burdens ofproofs needed for recourse processing. bezpečnost; dopravy; komunikace; silniční; infrastruktura; dopravní; přestupek	Automated traffic enforcement system. Project is focused on a very sensitive issue increasing transport safety and traffic work and law enforcement. The objective of the project is to develop automated traffic enforcement system along with designing database of driving offence and burdens ofproofs needed for recourse processing. bezpečnost; dopravy; komunikace; silniční; infrastruktura; dopravní; přestupek
Analysis of commercial and legal relationships between a public transport operator and a passenger. The project will analyse legislation of the Czech Republic and the European Union which is conected with relationships between a transport operator and a passenger and between a transport operator and a public authority. According to this analysis willbesuggested changes of this legislation or new legislation. dopravce; cestující; orgán; veřejné; správy; legislativní; předpis; kvalita; dopravy	Analysis of commercial and legal relationships between a public transport operator and a passenger. The project will analyse legislation of the Czech Republic and the European Union which is conected with relationships between a transport operator and a passenger and between a transport operator and a public authority. According to this analysis willbesuggested changes of this legislation or new legislation. dopravce; cestující; orgán; veřejné; správy; legislativní; předpis; kvalita; dopravy
Comprehensive methodics for evaluation of air pollution caused by road transportation A complex data base of emission data and additional information on dynamic structure and composition of the national fleet of cars will be created within this project. Reflected will be even changes during the time period between the years 2005 and 2020as well as the local driving conditions in the cities and outside. Other important items will be the primary and secondary dust counting, cold-cranking performance, drive through controlled and unattended junctions. Practical contribution will be the optimization and verification of the basic mathematical model relations for the calculation of emissions of the basic pollutants (CO, CxHy, NOx, NO2, PM), of selected organic substances (volatile hydrocarbons C1 - C12 including benzene and aromatics, C1 - C6aldehydes, polyaromatics) and of dust particles related to the type and emission category of the vehicle, to the used type of fuel and driving conditions including cold-cranking and drive through junctions. The utilization of this emission model will b emise; imise; organické polutanty; silniční doprava; studené starty; průjezdy křižovatkou; resuspenze částic; modelové výpočty	Comprehensive methodics for evaluation of air pollution caused by road transportation A complex data base of emission data and additional information on dynamic structure and composition of the national fleet of cars will be created within this project. Reflected will be even changes during the time period between the years 2005 and 2020as well as the local driving conditions in the cities and outside. Other important items will be the primary and secondary dust counting, cold-cranking performance, drive through controlled and unattended junctions. Practical contribution will be the optimization and verification of the basic mathematical model relations for the calculation of emissions of the basic pollutants (CO, CxHy, NOx, NO2, PM), of selected organic substances (volatile hydrocarbons C1 - C12 including benzene and aromatics, C1 - C6aldehydes, polyaromatics) and of dust particles related to the type and emission category of the vehicle, to the used type of fuel and driving conditions including cold-cranking and drive through junctions. The utilization of this emission model will b emise; imise; organické polutanty; silniční doprava; studené starty; průjezdy křižovatkou; resuspenze částic; modelové výpočty
Noise emission of vehicles, its limit values and contribution of partial noise sources to the whole noise emission of the vehicle in connection with introduction of the new measuring method ECE R 51. Verification of the new measuring method according to Regulation ECE 51, discussion of possible limit values, research in the field of partial noise sources of vehicles. Metoda měření; mezinárodní předpisy EHK; limitní hodnoty; dílčí zdroje hluku vozidel	Noise emission of vehicles, its limit values and contribution of partial noise sources to the whole noise emission of the vehicle in connection with introduction of the new measuring method ECE R 51. Verification of the new measuring method according to Regulation ECE 51, discussion of possible limit values, research in the field of partial noise sources of vehicles. Metoda měření; mezinárodní předpisy EHK; limitní hodnoty; dílčí zdroje hluku vozidel
Influence of highways and motorways on rainfall-runoff relations and their impact on water bodies pursuant to Directive 2000/60/EC establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy. The objective of the project is to assess the impact of highways and motorways on the rainfall-runoff relations of water bodies in the Czech Republic. The issue has become more and more important in connection with accession to EU and implementation of EC Directive 2000/60 (WFD) establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy. Based on the WFD, important demands for the member states are aimed at good ecological and chemical status of water bodies, and reduction or eliminationof leakages of the dangerous substances into the water environment. One of the influencing factors that should be taken into account is diffuse pollution in the form of surface rain-washing from buildup areas and roads. Construction of highways and motorways results in an increase of urbanised areas, and, in case of intensive precipitation, significant culminations and runoff relation changes mainly on smaller water courses. The input of many pollutants specific for the road transport pollution and en difuzní znečištění; znečištění nebodové; WFD - Rámcová směrnice; vodní útvary povrchových vod; složky vodního ekosystému; odtok povrchový; voda přívalová; splachová voda; znečištění vody povrchové; sněhová břečka; dálnice a rychlostní komunikace; zastav	Influence of highways and motorways on rainfall-runoff relations and their impact on water bodies pursuant to Directive 2000/60/EC establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy. The objective of the project is to assess the impact of highways and motorways on the rainfall-runoff relations of water bodies in the Czech Republic. The issue has become more and more important in connection with accession to EU and implementation of EC Directive 2000/60 (WFD) establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy. Based on the WFD, important demands for the member states are aimed at good ecological and chemical status of water bodies, and reduction or eliminationof leakages of the dangerous substances into the water environment. One of the influencing factors that should be taken into account is diffuse pollution in the form of surface rain-washing from buildup areas and roads. Construction of highways and motorways results in an increase of urbanised areas, and, in case of intensive precipitation, significant culminations and runoff relation changes mainly on smaller water courses. The input of many pollutants specific for the road transport pollution and en difuzní znečištění; znečištění nebodové; WFD - Rámcová směrnice; vodní útvary povrchových vod; složky vodního ekosystému; odtok povrchový; voda přívalová; splachová voda; znečištění vody povrchové; sněhová břečka; dálnice a rychlostní komunikace; zastav
Particle size distribution at exhaust gases of diesel engines Particles at exhaust gases of engines are different size, the smallest are the most harmfull for human health. This is not reflected at todays regulations. Size distributions are studiing at this project with the aim if nowadays regulations erflecting only mass of the particles are sufficient. vznětový motor; velikostní rozložení částic; emisní předpisy	Particle size distribution at exhaust gases of diesel engines Particles at exhaust gases of engines are different size, the smallest are the most harmfull for human health. This is not reflected at todays regulations. Size distributions are studiing at this project with the aim if nowadays regulations erflecting only mass of the particles are sufficient. vznětový motor; velikostní rozložení částic; emisní předpisy
The research and development of fuels for diesel engines with high content of biofuels. The testing of their properties and possibilities of their application for using in the transport. The utilization of alternative fuels is the part of the program for reducing of harmfull emission produced by vehicles and for lower dependence on supply of strategic raw material. One of the possible solution of this problem is the diesel fuel with highcontent of bioethanol. The aim of the proposal project is the proposal of the formulation of this fuel and verifying its function properties by the laboratory tests including determination of cetane number and by engine tests including full size enginetests. The result of the project will be the formulation of composition this fuel with high content of bioethanol with all necessary properties for the drive of diesel engines as the basis of its semi operational production and its using in the transport. alternativní paliva; bioetanol; metylestery mastných kyselin; zkoušení; formulace; biopaliva	The research and development of fuels for diesel engines with high content of biofuels. The testing of their properties and possibilities of their application for using in the transport. The utilization of alternative fuels is the part of the program for reducing of harmfull emission produced by vehicles and for lower dependence on supply of strategic raw material. One of the possible solution of this problem is the diesel fuel with highcontent of bioethanol. The aim of the proposal project is the proposal of the formulation of this fuel and verifying its function properties by the laboratory tests including determination of cetane number and by engine tests including full size enginetests. The result of the project will be the formulation of composition this fuel with high content of bioethanol with all necessary properties for the drive of diesel engines as the basis of its semi operational production and its using in the transport. alternativní paliva; bioetanol; metylestery mastných kyselin; zkoušení; formulace; biopaliva
Measurement and calculation of emission factors of non-limited polutants in blending biofuels exhaust gases in dependence of its composition and operation mode One solution of coming crude-iol crisis in the world is using of alternative fuels and biofuels. The share of biofuels at the Czech Republic now is very low. Increase of this share is necessary not only for reason mentioned above but too for implementation of direction 2003/30/EC concerning using of biofuels and other renewable fuels in transport. But using of biofuels is not without environmental and health hazards. During presented project will be measured emissions and calculated emissions factors ofselected polutants arise during biofuels combustion. Emission factors will be measured depending not only on fuel composition but on different driving mode too. Project will brings unique information about impact of biofuels. All resuls will be supportedby robust multivariate methods. biopaliva; etanol; bionafta; MEŘO; emise; emisní faktory; POP; PCDD/F; PCB; MVDA; gnostická analýza	Measurement and calculation of emission factors of non-limited polutants in blending biofuels exhaust gases in dependence of its composition and operation mode One solution of coming crude-iol crisis in the world is using of alternative fuels and biofuels. The share of biofuels at the Czech Republic now is very low. Increase of this share is necessary not only for reason mentioned above but too for implementation of direction 2003/30/EC concerning using of biofuels and other renewable fuels in transport. But using of biofuels is not without environmental and health hazards. During presented project will be measured emissions and calculated emissions factors ofselected polutants arise during biofuels combustion. Emission factors will be measured depending not only on fuel composition but on different driving mode too. Project will brings unique information about impact of biofuels. All resuls will be supportedby robust multivariate methods. biopaliva; etanol; bionafta; MEŘO; emise; emisní faktory; POP; PCDD/F; PCB; MVDA; gnostická analýza
Study for increasing safety of bus passengers aimed for simulation lateral rollover. Research of injury risk of passengers during rollover of basic bus designs using simulation methods in combination to real experimental tests. Research of influence of different variant of restraint system on biomechanical parameters of passengers. Comparison of results of simulation according to existing legislation ECE and EEC and with respecting future changes on the other hand. Autobus; boční převrácení; Předpis EHK 66; PAM-CRASH; figuríny; biomechanické kriterium	Study for increasing safety of bus passengers aimed for simulation lateral rollover. Research of injury risk of passengers during rollover of basic bus designs using simulation methods in combination to real experimental tests. Research of influence of different variant of restraint system on biomechanical parameters of passengers. Comparison of results of simulation according to existing legislation ECE and EEC and with respecting future changes on the other hand. Autobus; boční převrácení; Předpis EHK 66; PAM-CRASH; figuríny; biomechanické kriterium
The dustiness from traffic and its impacts of airborne immission loading with suspended particles. The main goal of the drafted project will bring the more understanding und new acquirements about the approachs of suspended particles matters from traffic in the airborne. This project will culminate in the proposal of a methodical instruction about precautions, which should direct to the decrease in dustinees of amtmosphere from traffic and herewith also restriction of negative influences on the human health. doprava; ovzduší; znečištění; pevné částice; modelování; imunitní systém	The dustiness from traffic and its impacts of airborne immission loading with suspended particles. The main goal of the drafted project will bring the more understanding und new acquirements about the approachs of suspended particles matters from traffic in the airborne. This project will culminate in the proposal of a methodical instruction about precautions, which should direct to the decrease in dustinees of amtmosphere from traffic and herewith also restriction of negative influences on the human health. doprava; ovzduší; znečištění; pevné částice; modelování; imunitní systém
The methodology of emissions flow calculation for the air quality monitoring, evaluation and management. The objective of the project is to develop the methodology of traffic emissions flow calculation that will solve all cases of the traffic as a linear air pollution source and also as the area or point air pollution source (congestions, intersections, parking sites). emisní tok; kongesce; znečištění ovzduší; dopravní výkon; modelování; rozptyl; POP	The methodology of emissions flow calculation for the air quality monitoring, evaluation and management. The objective of the project is to develop the methodology of traffic emissions flow calculation that will solve all cases of the traffic as a linear air pollution source and also as the area or point air pollution source (congestions, intersections, parking sites). emisní tok; kongesce; znečištění ovzduší; dopravní výkon; modelování; rozptyl; POP
Assessment of motorway construction impact on biodiversity within the surrounding areas When assessing motorway impact on plants, animals, and ecosystems, lack of basic limits is the main problem. The limits should describe the animals' tolerance to the impact of the traffic as well as they should ensure correct making of protective means.The project is based on the basic methodology approach, i.e. the belief that acceptable values can be determined based on the impact quantity in areas located along the motorways and busy roads where the animals of a specific kind are found. The aim oftheproject is to create a database of acceptable values for soil contamination, pollution, and noise impact. The database shall provide a methodology handbook for assessing motorway construction impact on biodiversity. The results shall be used when solving conflicts between road and motorway constructions and the up-and-coming NATURA 2000 system members. biodiverzita; imise; hluk; kontaminace	Assessment of motorway construction impact on biodiversity within the surrounding areas When assessing motorway impact on plants, animals, and ecosystems, lack of basic limits is the main problem. The limits should describe the animals' tolerance to the impact of the traffic as well as they should ensure correct making of protective means.The project is based on the basic methodology approach, i.e. the belief that acceptable values can be determined based on the impact quantity in areas located along the motorways and busy roads where the animals of a specific kind are found. The aim oftheproject is to create a database of acceptable values for soil contamination, pollution, and noise impact. The database shall provide a methodology handbook for assessing motorway construction impact on biodiversity. The results shall be used when solving conflicts between road and motorway constructions and the up-and-coming NATURA 2000 system members. biodiverzita; imise; hluk; kontaminace
Methodology for assessment noise impact from motorways on the wildlife. When designing migration motorway passages for large mammals and when dealing with designed motorway routes colliding with up-and-coming NATURA 2000 bird reservations, there is a lack of the real values of the animals' sensitivity to noise. Therefore themassive multi-million noise barriers are based on mere intuition. The purpose of this project is to (i) carry out basic assessment of the problem, (ii) select appropriate means to describe the noise impact related to the animals, and (iii) determine initial acceptable values based on noise level measurements taken in places located along the contemporary roads and motorways where the population is found. The activity shall result in methodology suitable for road investment workers as well as for the state authorities and offices. dálnice; hluk; živočichové	Methodology for assessment noise impact from motorways on the wildlife. When designing migration motorway passages for large mammals and when dealing with designed motorway routes colliding with up-and-coming NATURA 2000 bird reservations, there is a lack of the real values of the animals' sensitivity to noise. Therefore themassive multi-million noise barriers are based on mere intuition. The purpose of this project is to (i) carry out basic assessment of the problem, (ii) select appropriate means to describe the noise impact related to the animals, and (iii) determine initial acceptable values based on noise level measurements taken in places located along the contemporary roads and motorways where the population is found. The activity shall result in methodology suitable for road investment workers as well as for the state authorities and offices. dálnice; hluk; živočichové
MULTICRITERIAL EVALUATION OF THE RAILWAY LEVEL CROSSING HAZARDOUSNESS Proposal and application of the railway level crossing hazardousness evaluation method. Dimensionless quantification is to evaluate the degree of the level crossing hazardousness, i.e. conflict point of the railway track and road depending on the local parameters: geometry of the road to the track in the crossing area, lateral and longitudinal unevenness of the road in railway crossing approaches, roughness of the wearing course, vehicle driver´s visibility conditions, road signs and signalling, area illumination, possible driver sun glare etc. The parameters affect drivers´ behaving and acting within the railway crossing area. železniční přejezd; nehodovost; bezpečnost; pozemní komunikace	MULTICRITERIAL EVALUATION OF THE RAILWAY LEVEL CROSSING HAZARDOUSNESS Proposal and application of the railway level crossing hazardousness evaluation method. Dimensionless quantification is to evaluate the degree of the level crossing hazardousness, i.e. conflict point of the railway track and road depending on the local parameters: geometry of the road to the track in the crossing area, lateral and longitudinal unevenness of the road in railway crossing approaches, roughness of the wearing course, vehicle driver´s visibility conditions, road signs and signalling, area illumination, possible driver sun glare etc. The parameters affect drivers´ behaving and acting within the railway crossing area. železniční přejezd; nehodovost; bezpečnost; pozemní komunikace
Stationary complex system of driver education and motivators for traffic rules observance on highways and roads In the frame of the analytical project part the research of driver education and training, of motivators for the safe traffic on highways and ground roads and of vindicatory systems used in selected EU countries will be accomplished. In the frame of thesynthetic project part the acquired information will be analyzed comprehensively and on this basis the methodology of the more effective education and training, of the re-examination of drivers, of optimizing the vindicatory system and of possible furthermotivators for raising the highways and roads traffic safety will be proposed. řidič; /; autoškola; /; výchova; výcvik; /; pozemní; komunikace; /; sankční; systém; /; bezpečnost; provozu; /; Evropská; unie; /; Česká; republika; /; dopravní; statistika; /; dopravní; psychologie; /; dopravní; legislativa; /; dopravní; policie	Stationary complex system of driver education and motivators for traffic rules observance on highways and roads In the frame of the analytical project part the research of driver education and training, of motivators for the safe traffic on highways and ground roads and of vindicatory systems used in selected EU countries will be accomplished. In the frame of thesynthetic project part the acquired information will be analyzed comprehensively and on this basis the methodology of the more effective education and training, of the re-examination of drivers, of optimizing the vindicatory system and of possible furthermotivators for raising the highways and roads traffic safety will be proposed. řidič; /; autoškola; /; výchova; výcvik; /; pozemní; komunikace; /; sankční; systém; /; bezpečnost; provozu; /; Evropská; unie; /; Česká; republika; /; dopravní; statistika; /; dopravní; psychologie; /; dopravní; legislativa; /; dopravní; policie
Internet portal "Traffic lights" road education of children and young people as instrument preventive activity in domain road safety on ground communications Internet portal "Traffic lights" (http://portal.semafor.com) will different own original concept and entrance to children and young people. Will setting emphasis for good-looking, image, funny concept, competitive ghost. Even if will "Traffic lights" make this template so don´t lose its basic intention and it information pupils about road education and activity which hang prevention and road safety on ground communications. Internet portal "Traffic lights" could be strong preventive communication activity besip. internetový; portál; php; sql; besip; semafor; dopravní; výchova; pozemní; komunikace	Internet portal "Traffic lights" road education of children and young people as instrument preventive activity in domain road safety on ground communications Internet portal "Traffic lights" (http://portal.semafor.com) will different own original concept and entrance to children and young people. Will setting emphasis for good-looking, image, funny concept, competitive ghost. Even if will "Traffic lights" make this template so don´t lose its basic intention and it information pupils about road education and activity which hang prevention and road safety on ground communications. Internet portal "Traffic lights" could be strong preventive communication activity besip. internetový; portál; php; sql; besip; semafor; dopravní; výchova; pozemní; komunikace
Truck's weighing conceptual model for the Czech Republic - groundwork The goal of the research project is to submit groundwork for creation and following realisation of conceptual model of the truck's weighing system in the Czech Republic with the verification of the possible use of the High Speed Weighing in Motion on theCzech road network. The main details for the purpose are results of research works in the areas of influence of truck traffic on pavements, influence of overloaded truck traffic on pavements and on traffic safety, analysis of legislative constitution with recommendation to a creation of methodology for a truck's weighing system in the Czech Republic. Vážení nákladních vozidel; degradace vozovky; vážení za pohybu; bezpečnost dopravy; přetížené nákladní vozidlo	Truck's weighing conceptual model for the Czech Republic - groundwork The goal of the research project is to submit groundwork for creation and following realisation of conceptual model of the truck's weighing system in the Czech Republic with the verification of the possible use of the High Speed Weighing in Motion on theCzech road network. The main details for the purpose are results of research works in the areas of influence of truck traffic on pavements, influence of overloaded truck traffic on pavements and on traffic safety, analysis of legislative constitution with recommendation to a creation of methodology for a truck's weighing system in the Czech Republic. Vážení nákladních vozidel; degradace vozovky; vážení za pohybu; bezpečnost dopravy; přetížené nákladní vozidlo
Research of passive road traffic safety Project deals with a neglected question of passive road traffic safety forgiving road. The aim is to collect a sufficiency of information on the topic and to publish them. Next aim si to prepare suggestion for changes in adequate technical standards andguidelines. Basis of project is analysis of information from Czech Republic and abroad. pasivní bezpečnost; komunikace; rešerše; okolí komunikace; krajnice; pevná překážka; analýza nehodovosti; bezpečnostní zóna	Research of passive road traffic safety Project deals with a neglected question of passive road traffic safety forgiving road. The aim is to collect a sufficiency of information on the topic and to publish them. Next aim si to prepare suggestion for changes in adequate technical standards andguidelines. Basis of project is analysis of information from Czech Republic and abroad. pasivní bezpečnost; komunikace; rešerše; okolí komunikace; krajnice; pevná překážka; analýza nehodovosti; bezpečnostní zóna
The risky driver behaviour and possibilities of its specified improvement. The project is targeted to analysis and categorisation of traffic offences in relation to personal characteristics of offenders. The main goal of this project is to developt a model of rehabilitation program for drivers, which are not able to comply to traffic rules. This model will be evaluated by pilot project. kategorie; dopravních; přestupků; závažnost; dopravních; přestupků; četnost; dopravních; přestupků; dopravní; chování; problémový; řidič; práce; problémovým; řidičem; rehabilitační; program; dopravně; psychologická; diagnostika	The risky driver behaviour and possibilities of its specified improvement. The project is targeted to analysis and categorisation of traffic offences in relation to personal characteristics of offenders. The main goal of this project is to developt a model of rehabilitation program for drivers, which are not able to comply to traffic rules. This model will be evaluated by pilot project. kategorie; dopravních; přestupků; závažnost; dopravních; přestupků; četnost; dopravních; přestupků; dopravní; chování; problémový; řidič; práce; problémovým; řidičem; rehabilitační; program; dopravně; psychologická; diagnostika
Czech road traffic safety observatory The main issue of the project is to ensure compatibility of the Czech national road safety data and road safety performance indicators with the EU standards and to ensure increasing of efficiency in road traffic safety decision making on all levels. Thesecond issue is to establish the Czech national road safety observatory and their Internet application. Bezpečnost; vozidlo; komunikace; chování řidiče; monitoring; databáze nehod; nehodový formulář; analýza nehod; rychlost; alkohol; pasivní bezpečnost; CARE	Czech road traffic safety observatory The main issue of the project is to ensure compatibility of the Czech national road safety data and road safety performance indicators with the EU standards and to ensure increasing of efficiency in road traffic safety decision making on all levels. Thesecond issue is to establish the Czech national road safety observatory and their Internet application. Bezpečnost; vozidlo; komunikace; chování řidiče; monitoring; databáze nehod; nehodový formulář; analýza nehod; rychlost; alkohol; pasivní bezpečnost; CARE
System of preparation and further training of professional drivers developing their ability to drive safely. System of preparation and further training of professional drivers developing their ability to drive safely. kvalifikace řidiče pravidelné školení	System of preparation and further training of professional drivers developing their ability to drive safely. System of preparation and further training of professional drivers developing their ability to drive safely. kvalifikace řidiče pravidelné školení
Steel Bridges Failures Evaluation The main aim of research is to collect frequently existing failures of steel and composite (steel and concrete) bridges. Failures will evaluated from both reasons and results. Final recommendations will lead bridge designers to better solutions. Mosty; ocelové mosty; spřažené mosty; závady; poruchy; doporučení	Steel Bridges Failures Evaluation The main aim of research is to collect frequently existing failures of steel and composite (steel and concrete) bridges. Failures will evaluated from both reasons and results. Final recommendations will lead bridge designers to better solutions. Mosty; ocelové mosty; spřažené mosty; závady; poruchy; doporučení
Load capacity assessment of masonry arch bridges Basic idea of the project resides in the development of a method for load capacity assessment of masonry arch bridges applicable in mass scalei for structural engineers without special knowledge. Besides existing assessment methods abroad, simulations will be used in the dvelopmen of the bridge loading with modern analytical methods including non-linear material behavior. For this purpose, available in-house and commercial methods and computer programs need be complemented and adapted. As a result, potential appears for detailed analysis of important bridges. Since any approximate method has its applicability bounds, determination of the ranges and basic statistical characteristics of the principal dimensions, materials, age and other parameters of masonry arch bridges in our country is a part of the projekt. zděné klenbové mosty; únosnost; pevnost; napětí	Load capacity assessment of masonry arch bridges Basic idea of the project resides in the development of a method for load capacity assessment of masonry arch bridges applicable in mass scalei for structural engineers without special knowledge. Besides existing assessment methods abroad, simulations will be used in the dvelopmen of the bridge loading with modern analytical methods including non-linear material behavior. For this purpose, available in-house and commercial methods and computer programs need be complemented and adapted. As a result, potential appears for detailed analysis of important bridges. Since any approximate method has its applicability bounds, determination of the ranges and basic statistical characteristics of the principal dimensions, materials, age and other parameters of masonry arch bridges in our country is a part of the projekt. zděné klenbové mosty; únosnost; pevnost; napětí
Methodology for assessment of land permeability for linear constructions When designing new motorways and roads, it is necessary to deal with their collisions with various parts of the environment and means of using the land. The basic problem is to determine priorities of the individual counterparts and reaching the final conclusion. The aim of the project is to update the current land permeability methodology, mainly regarding (i) changes in environmental legislation, (ii) setting the priorities for the individual counterparts related to the frequency of their occurrence,carried out by means of a large scale questionnaire research among experts, (iii) applying overall land permeability models within the GIS system. The result shall serve as a complex methodology interactive CD for project architects, investment workers,and state authorities and offices. silnice; krajina; GIS; životní prostředí	Methodology for assessment of land permeability for linear constructions When designing new motorways and roads, it is necessary to deal with their collisions with various parts of the environment and means of using the land. The basic problem is to determine priorities of the individual counterparts and reaching the final conclusion. The aim of the project is to update the current land permeability methodology, mainly regarding (i) changes in environmental legislation, (ii) setting the priorities for the individual counterparts related to the frequency of their occurrence,carried out by means of a large scale questionnaire research among experts, (iii) applying overall land permeability models within the GIS system. The result shall serve as a complex methodology interactive CD for project architects, investment workers,and state authorities and offices. silnice; krajina; GIS; životní prostředí
Resistance and service safety of bridges as a part of roads crossing rivers. The processing of principles of a new arrangement in design and assessment of bridges across rivers. In present-day methods there is missing cohesion between road designers, designers of bridges and water designers. Defects were shown by floods in 1997 and 2002. New approach will be led in a spirit of a new european standards design and probabilistic methods will be used. Priorities are reliability and safety of traffic road, respecting of water-design requirments and influence on surrounding landscapeand built-up area. vodní tok; povodeň; porucha; spolehlivost; bezpečnost; pravděpodobnost	Resistance and service safety of bridges as a part of roads crossing rivers. The processing of principles of a new arrangement in design and assessment of bridges across rivers. In present-day methods there is missing cohesion between road designers, designers of bridges and water designers. Defects were shown by floods in 1997 and 2002. New approach will be led in a spirit of a new european standards design and probabilistic methods will be used. Priorities are reliability and safety of traffic road, respecting of water-design requirments and influence on surrounding landscapeand built-up area. vodní tok; povodeň; porucha; spolehlivost; bezpečnost; pravděpodobnost
Bridge management system - financial modulus Build up of the financial modulus for BMS, which can help to make a decision for bridge maintenance. Based on the service life time prediction and comparison of the financial cost for diferent methods of repair and maintenence. - searches from foreign special literature, - choice of the appropriate methods for economical assesment for bridge maintenence and repair, - design of the financial modulus for BMS and his pilot operation, - evaluation for pilot operation, - startup of the financial modulusin BMS. Systém hospodaření s mosty; strategie plánování údržby; program údržby mostů; rozpočet pro údržbu mostů; modely degradace; odhad životnosti; údržba mostů a trvanlivost; finanční modul	Bridge management system - financial modulus Build up of the financial modulus for BMS, which can help to make a decision for bridge maintenance. Based on the service life time prediction and comparison of the financial cost for diferent methods of repair and maintenence. - searches from foreign special literature, - choice of the appropriate methods for economical assesment for bridge maintenence and repair, - design of the financial modulus for BMS and his pilot operation, - evaluation for pilot operation, - startup of the financial modulusin BMS. Systém hospodaření s mosty; strategie plánování údržby; program údržby mostů; rozpočet pro údržbu mostů; modely degradace; odhad životnosti; údržba mostů a trvanlivost; finanční modul
Utilization of the traffic engineering data for exact quantification of the transport impacts on the environment The aim of task is to propose the utilization of the traffic engineering data for exact quantification of the transport impacts on the environment, unification of the used data fields, their accuracy and methods of these data processing. The projects needs to discover the needs of studies makers about the transport impacts on the environment on the traffic engineering data, to find out what kind of data they will need in the relation of harmonizing of our regulations with the regulations of the EuropeanUnion, to confront the proven needs with the level of the available data fields. The output of the project will be the methodical instruction "Transport engineering data for purposes of the assessment of the impacts on environment" or directly "Technicalconditions". dopravní inženýrství; životní prostředí; posuzování vlivů	Utilization of the traffic engineering data for exact quantification of the transport impacts on the environment The aim of task is to propose the utilization of the traffic engineering data for exact quantification of the transport impacts on the environment, unification of the used data fields, their accuracy and methods of these data processing. The projects needs to discover the needs of studies makers about the transport impacts on the environment on the traffic engineering data, to find out what kind of data they will need in the relation of harmonizing of our regulations with the regulations of the EuropeanUnion, to confront the proven needs with the level of the available data fields. The output of the project will be the methodical instruction "Transport engineering data for purposes of the assessment of the impacts on environment" or directly "Technicalconditions". dopravní inženýrství; životní prostředí; posuzování vlivů
Complex method of monitoring and detailed measuring approach of crack propagation in conrete Crack appearance in the concrete bridge structures could strongly influence reliability and durability. The uniform method of crack measuring and monitoring is not included in the present standards. The proposal of measuring procedure will be elaboratedand verified by statistical analysis of data obtained by measuring of crack width at specimens prepared and tested in the laboratory. The theoretical values of cracks width will be compared with cracks width identified on surface of the real structures.The most available method will be chosen according to accuracy, reproducibility, accessibility, portability and cost of device. betonová konstrukce; mostní konstrukce; diagnostika; trhlina; šířka trhliny; trvanlivost	Complex method of monitoring and detailed measuring approach of crack propagation in conrete Crack appearance in the concrete bridge structures could strongly influence reliability and durability. The uniform method of crack measuring and monitoring is not included in the present standards. The proposal of measuring procedure will be elaboratedand verified by statistical analysis of data obtained by measuring of crack width at specimens prepared and tested in the laboratory. The theoretical values of cracks width will be compared with cracks width identified on surface of the real structures.The most available method will be chosen according to accuracy, reproducibility, accessibility, portability and cost of device. betonová konstrukce; mostní konstrukce; diagnostika; trhlina; šířka trhliny; trvanlivost
Concrete pavements - new technologies of construction, reconstruction and reparation, incl. concrete and asphalt technologies comparison, link-up to surface characteristics, long-term monitoring Within the framework of the project solution data on new technologies of construction, reconstruction and reparation of cement concrete pavements will be collected and evaluated. A comparison of asphalt and cement concrete technologies in relation to thesurface characteristics of pavements will be carried out. The project also includes a long-term monitoring of the behaviour of newly constructed parts as well as the successfulness of the used reparation and reconstruction technologies of cement concretewearing courses. Vozovky cementobetonové; vozovky tuhé; vozovky netuhé; vozovky asfaltové; opravy vozovek; rekonstrukce vozovek; nové technologie; měřicí metody; dlouhodobé sledování	Concrete pavements - new technologies of construction, reconstruction and reparation, incl. concrete and asphalt technologies comparison, link-up to surface characteristics, long-term monitoring Within the framework of the project solution data on new technologies of construction, reconstruction and reparation of cement concrete pavements will be collected and evaluated. A comparison of asphalt and cement concrete technologies in relation to thesurface characteristics of pavements will be carried out. The project also includes a long-term monitoring of the behaviour of newly constructed parts as well as the successfulness of the used reparation and reconstruction technologies of cement concretewearing courses. Vozovky cementobetonové; vozovky tuhé; vozovky netuhé; vozovky asfaltové; opravy vozovek; rekonstrukce vozovek; nové technologie; měřicí metody; dlouhodobé sledování
Prestressing of Concrete Bridges by Fibre Composites. Project is focused on prestressing of concrete bridges by composites. The foreign methods of prestressing, materials and methods of analysis will be evaluated. Method of prestressing, materials used will be evaluated by testing in laboratory and in situ.Methodology for design of concrete bridges prestressed by composites will be proposed. Elaboration of proposal concerning Technical Regulations for Prestressing of Bridges by Fibre Composites. betonové mosty; zesilování; předpětí; vláknové kompozity	Prestressing of Concrete Bridges by Fibre Composites. Project is focused on prestressing of concrete bridges by composites. The foreign methods of prestressing, materials and methods of analysis will be evaluated. Method of prestressing, materials used will be evaluated by testing in laboratory and in situ.Methodology for design of concrete bridges prestressed by composites will be proposed. Elaboration of proposal concerning Technical Regulations for Prestressing of Bridges by Fibre Composites. betonové mosty; zesilování; předpětí; vláknové kompozity
Establishing a conversion factor between resistance parameters measured by frost resistance tests of concrete and tests of concrete resistance to frost and defrosting chemicals as per the respective methodology of ČSN and EN standards. The objective of the proposed project is comparing results of frost resistance of concrete measured by the methodology of Czech standards and the drafted European standard. The comparison shall encompass following standards: - ČSN 73 1322 "Determinationof frost resistance of concrete", - ČSN 73 1326 (including amendment Z1) "Resistance of cement concrete surface to water and defrosting chemicals" (procedures A and C) - EN 12 390 " Testing hardened concrete" - Part 9: Freeze-thaw resistance, Scaling(standard in development, all three procedures will be used, in both modifications) The experiments shall compare results of different testing methods applied to the same concrete in order to find out their possible relation and, if positive, to give its description. These tests will be performed with basic types of concrete used for construction and repair of roads and highways. These will be mainly structural concretes (including self-compacting), pavement concretes and fine grain mixtures. An inte beton; mrazuvzdornost; odolnost betonu; trvanlivost betonu; chemické rozmrazovací látky; evropské normy; zkoušení betonu	Establishing a conversion factor between resistance parameters measured by frost resistance tests of concrete and tests of concrete resistance to frost and defrosting chemicals as per the respective methodology of ČSN and EN standards. The objective of the proposed project is comparing results of frost resistance of concrete measured by the methodology of Czech standards and the drafted European standard. The comparison shall encompass following standards: - ČSN 73 1322 "Determinationof frost resistance of concrete", - ČSN 73 1326 (including amendment Z1) "Resistance of cement concrete surface to water and defrosting chemicals" (procedures A and C) - EN 12 390 " Testing hardened concrete" - Part 9: Freeze-thaw resistance, Scaling(standard in development, all three procedures will be used, in both modifications) The experiments shall compare results of different testing methods applied to the same concrete in order to find out their possible relation and, if positive, to give its description. These tests will be performed with basic types of concrete used for construction and repair of roads and highways. These will be mainly structural concretes (including self-compacting), pavement concretes and fine grain mixtures. An inte beton; mrazuvzdornost; odolnost betonu; trvanlivost betonu; chemické rozmrazovací látky; evropské normy; zkoušení betonu
The modelling of servicing systems of public transit, individual transport and traffic infrastructure in relation to suburbanisation aspects. The research project solves the question of traffic demand determination of residential areas and objects of regions. It proposes effective long-term way of data collecting that is needed for transport use. It proposes and evaluates the pilot study of mathematical and statistical models of traffic demands for different objects and residence territories. traffic demands in a territory; modelling of transport demands; origins and destinations od ways; traffic servicing of territory	The modelling of servicing systems of public transit, individual transport and traffic infrastructure in relation to suburbanisation aspects. The research project solves the question of traffic demand determination of residential areas and objects of regions. It proposes effective long-term way of data collecting that is needed for transport use. It proposes and evaluates the pilot study of mathematical and statistical models of traffic demands for different objects and residence territories. traffic demands in a territory; modelling of transport demands; origins and destinations od ways; traffic servicing of territory
Prognosis of basic traffic features in the Czech Republic in distant future. Project proposed to develop th real scenario of traffic prognosis in the Czech republic. prognosis of traffic; traffic volume	Prognosis of basic traffic features in the Czech Republic in distant future. Project proposed to develop th real scenario of traffic prognosis in the Czech republic. prognosis of traffic; traffic volume
Research of system architecture for payment and automatic identification using GSM technology in public transport The project should research requirements and system architecture for payment in public transport using GSM technology. Drafted architecture should be tested and regarding results of test there should be done standardisation recommendation. payment system for public transport GSM technology	Research of system architecture for payment and automatic identification using GSM technology in public transport The project should research requirements and system architecture for payment in public transport using GSM technology. Drafted architecture should be tested and regarding results of test there should be done standardisation recommendation. payment system for public transport GSM technology
Alternative ways of public transport operation in rural areas The aim of the project is to develop methodology for alternative public transport systems suitable for rural areas and to contribute to practical application of the new methodology. Public transport; rural areas; methodology; transport demand; Tachov; Stříbro	Alternative ways of public transport operation in rural areas The aim of the project is to develop methodology for alternative public transport systems suitable for rural areas and to contribute to practical application of the new methodology. Public transport; rural areas; methodology; transport demand; Tachov; Stříbro
Integrated architecture of payment systém in transport At present, there are a lot of card systems operated in the transport and public administration in the form of transport cards or city cards. Although nearly all systems use the same technologies and their function is very similar, such local card systems are isolated and mutually not interconnected. Demands resulting from growing mobility of population and the necessity to accelerate and provide various identification acts leads to the requirement to interconnect such systems and often even to unite them. E-ticketing; Electronc; fare; management; Systém; architecture; Smartcards; Transactions; management	Integrated architecture of payment systém in transport At present, there are a lot of card systems operated in the transport and public administration in the form of transport cards or city cards. Although nearly all systems use the same technologies and their function is very similar, such local card systems are isolated and mutually not interconnected. Demands resulting from growing mobility of population and the necessity to accelerate and provide various identification acts leads to the requirement to interconnect such systems and often even to unite them. E-ticketing; Electronc; fare; management; Systém; architecture; Smartcards; Transactions; management
Methodology for public transport quality indicators setting and their evaluation First stage of the project focuses on the data collection, tehir analyses and comaparison with the EU practice. In the second phase, draft versions of relevant documents will be prepared and later presented for consultation with all stakeholders; EU experts will be consulted in order to reach harmonisation with the proposed European measures. In the final phase, all documents will be completed and published in the form of Final Report public; transport; public; urban; transport; quality; public; transport; mobility; planning; transport; statistics; users´; rights	Methodology for public transport quality indicators setting and their evaluation First stage of the project focuses on the data collection, tehir analyses and comaparison with the EU practice. In the second phase, draft versions of relevant documents will be prepared and later presented for consultation with all stakeholders; EU experts will be consulted in order to reach harmonisation with the proposed European measures. In the final phase, all documents will be completed and published in the form of Final Report public; transport; public; urban; transport; quality; public; transport; mobility; planning; transport; statistics; users´; rights
Standards Suggestion of Railway Stations, Railway Halts and Change Nodes on Non-European Railway System The project solves complex semblance of the public transport change nodes that merits are railway stations and railway halts on non-european railway system in the Czech Republic. The project optimise waiting times between connection joints, solves delayted connection joints problems and the best semblance (large, disposition) equipment in change nodes. public transport	Standards Suggestion of Railway Stations, Railway Halts and Change Nodes on Non-European Railway System The project solves complex semblance of the public transport change nodes that merits are railway stations and railway halts on non-european railway system in the Czech Republic. The project optimise waiting times between connection joints, solves delayted connection joints problems and the best semblance (large, disposition) equipment in change nodes. public transport
The Grade Crossing in the Transport System of the Czech Republic The project concerns comprehensive solution of grade crossing problems and its integration to the transport system. The project also takes into account specificities and limiting factors of a grade crossing into regional transport system which has significant influence on integration process of the ecological acceptable rail transport to the scope of sustainable territory service development and spreading integrated transport systems. The analytical part contains the comprehensive users? analyses of ambient, legislation, proprietorial and organizational frameworks, but it also contains technical and technological possibilities of improving the safety on the grade crossing, namely using direct and indirect way. The suggestion part subsequently containsthe suggestions of the rules of law modifications, which refer to the construction and operation of a grade crossing, the suggestions of technical and technological standards modifications for construction and operation of technical security systems Grade crossing; accidents analyses; risks factors; security systems	The Grade Crossing in the Transport System of the Czech Republic The project concerns comprehensive solution of grade crossing problems and its integration to the transport system. The project also takes into account specificities and limiting factors of a grade crossing into regional transport system which has significant influence on integration process of the ecological acceptable rail transport to the scope of sustainable territory service development and spreading integrated transport systems. The analytical part contains the comprehensive users? analyses of ambient, legislation, proprietorial and organizational frameworks, but it also contains technical and technological possibilities of improving the safety on the grade crossing, namely using direct and indirect way. The suggestion part subsequently containsthe suggestions of the rules of law modifications, which refer to the construction and operation of a grade crossing, the suggestions of technical and technological standards modifications for construction and operation of technical security systems Grade crossing; accidents analyses; risks factors; security systems
Rationalisation of Transport Operation and Extent of Transport Infrastructure on the Railway Lines out of Corridors. The main goal of this project is to find quality and quantitatively relations between amount of traffic and extent of transport infrastructure on the lines out of corridors in the frame of rational expending of financial resources into transport infrastructure and operation. These relations will be determine with using of a simulation model. The output will be the methodology for support of decision making in infrastructure investment activity on the lines out of corridors with regard to amount of traffic. This methodology will be verified by a simulation model. Railway lines out of corridors; transport infrastructure; operation; rationalisation; investments	Rationalisation of Transport Operation and Extent of Transport Infrastructure on the Railway Lines out of Corridors. The main goal of this project is to find quality and quantitatively relations between amount of traffic and extent of transport infrastructure on the lines out of corridors in the frame of rational expending of financial resources into transport infrastructure and operation. These relations will be determine with using of a simulation model. The output will be the methodology for support of decision making in infrastructure investment activity on the lines out of corridors with regard to amount of traffic. This methodology will be verified by a simulation model. Railway lines out of corridors; transport infrastructure; operation; rationalisation; investments
Research of light track form (railway sub and super structure) for regional railway lines. Purpose of the project is to specify new conditions for redevelopment and new constructions of the regional railway lines with accent for their utility values. The experiences from realized railway projects in foreign countries with similar parameteres. regional railway lines; design of the track form; substrukture design; continous weldet rail; alignment of the line	Research of light track form (railway sub and super structure) for regional railway lines. Purpose of the project is to specify new conditions for redevelopment and new constructions of the regional railway lines with accent for their utility values. The experiences from realized railway projects in foreign countries with similar parameteres. regional railway lines; design of the track form; substrukture design; continous weldet rail; alignment of the line
Analysis and evaluation of measures for reduction of number of accidents on railway crossings. Analysis of factors contributing to accident on railway crossings, presentation of examples of in-depth analysis of accidents and their relations to road design. Questioning of train drivers, station staff and technicians. Creating check-iist for road safety inspection of railway crossings. Railway crossing; factors contributing to accidents; accident analysis; analysis of risk factors; user manual for railway and road safety management; road safety inspection	Analysis and evaluation of measures for reduction of number of accidents on railway crossings. Analysis of factors contributing to accident on railway crossings, presentation of examples of in-depth analysis of accidents and their relations to road design. Questioning of train drivers, station staff and technicians. Creating check-iist for road safety inspection of railway crossings. Railway crossing; factors contributing to accidents; accident analysis; analysis of risk factors; user manual for railway and road safety management; road safety inspection
Load rating time prediction and life time of masonry arch bridges Load rating assessment of masonry arch bridges in the Czech Republic is updated and suppplemented by its degradation and life time prediction. The update stems from detailed non-linear structural analyses of the population sample of czech bridges. The assessment formula is a mathematically processed extract of these analyses. For the load rating and life time predictions, laboratory tests are planned on masonry columns which imitate the repeated reverse loading of the arch masonry by vehicles passages in the range of 0.1-1 million. Hypothesis asserts that this loading along with the environment impact is the source of the joints and bridge degradation. The load/number of cycles dependence together with stochastic data of the traffic load makes the loadrating prediction possible. masonry arch bridges; load rating; load rating prediction; laboratory tests; masonry; cyclic reverse load	Load rating time prediction and life time of masonry arch bridges Load rating assessment of masonry arch bridges in the Czech Republic is updated and suppplemented by its degradation and life time prediction. The update stems from detailed non-linear structural analyses of the population sample of czech bridges. The assessment formula is a mathematically processed extract of these analyses. For the load rating and life time predictions, laboratory tests are planned on masonry columns which imitate the repeated reverse loading of the arch masonry by vehicles passages in the range of 0.1-1 million. Hypothesis asserts that this loading along with the environment impact is the source of the joints and bridge degradation. The load/number of cycles dependence together with stochastic data of the traffic load makes the loadrating prediction possible. masonry arch bridges; load rating; load rating prediction; laboratory tests; masonry; cyclic reverse load
SYSTEMIC DEFECTS OF THE BRIDGE EXPANSION JOINTS, RISK ASSESSMENT. The Project will analyse systemic defects of the bridge expansion joints and identify cause of the defects. Changes leading to the elimination of the defects will be recommended and implanted in to the Ministry of Transport Bridges Specification. The outcome of the project will lead to improve the durability of the bridges in Czech Republic and remove potential hazard to traffic. Systemic defects; Bridge expansion joints; safety; traffic	SYSTEMIC DEFECTS OF THE BRIDGE EXPANSION JOINTS, RISK ASSESSMENT. The Project will analyse systemic defects of the bridge expansion joints and identify cause of the defects. Changes leading to the elimination of the defects will be recommended and implanted in to the Ministry of Transport Bridges Specification. The outcome of the project will lead to improve the durability of the bridges in Czech Republic and remove potential hazard to traffic. Systemic defects; Bridge expansion joints; safety; traffic
ASSESSMENT OF THE RESIDUAL LIFETIME OF THE MAIN STRUCTURAL PARTS OF THE BRIDGES PRODUCED OF WEATHERED STEEL MATERIALS. Using the methodology developed by the author, the Project analyses a residual lifetime of steel structures deteriorated by the corrosion. The project analyses location of the structures in corrosive environment, influence of the microclimate, structuredetails and dynamic stresses on structures. Suitable procedures for the rehabilitation of the damaged structures are proposed. Residual lifetime of structures; weathering steel; corrosive environment	ASSESSMENT OF THE RESIDUAL LIFETIME OF THE MAIN STRUCTURAL PARTS OF THE BRIDGES PRODUCED OF WEATHERED STEEL MATERIALS. Using the methodology developed by the author, the Project analyses a residual lifetime of steel structures deteriorated by the corrosion. The project analyses location of the structures in corrosive environment, influence of the microclimate, structuredetails and dynamic stresses on structures. Suitable procedures for the rehabilitation of the damaged structures are proposed. Residual lifetime of structures; weathering steel; corrosive environment
Longterm experimental investigation of the heavy traffic and thermal response of the bridges. Longterm experimental investigation of the bridge response on heavy traffic and thermal actions. Determination of the level and longterm trends of the bridge response. Assessment ot the response level arising from the real traffic action and the comparison with response level calculated according to ČSN EN 1991-1-2 Comparison of the experimental and theoretical response of bridge structures. bridge; traffic action; thermal action; traffic monitoring; response measurement	Longterm experimental investigation of the heavy traffic and thermal response of the bridges. Longterm experimental investigation of the bridge response on heavy traffic and thermal actions. Determination of the level and longterm trends of the bridge response. Assessment ot the response level arising from the real traffic action and the comparison with response level calculated according to ČSN EN 1991-1-2 Comparison of the experimental and theoretical response of bridge structures. bridge; traffic action; thermal action; traffic monitoring; response measurement
Highway concrete pavement damage by AAR: its reason and extent Selected highway concrete pavement will be analysed for: surface crack pattern, quantitative microscopic structure, alkali-reactive aggregate particles and quartz deformation. Their mutual relationships will be compared. Concrete pavement; AAR; specific lenght of cracks; petrographical methods; quartz deformation	Highway concrete pavement damage by AAR: its reason and extent Selected highway concrete pavement will be analysed for: surface crack pattern, quantitative microscopic structure, alkali-reactive aggregate particles and quartz deformation. Their mutual relationships will be compared. Concrete pavement; AAR; specific lenght of cracks; petrographical methods; quartz deformation
Advanced methods for reliability assessment of existing road bridges Simplified conservative procedures for the reliability assessment of existing bridges based on the methods applied for the design of new structures may lead to expensive and time-consuming repairs of bridges. Therefore, the proposed project is focused onthe development of advanced methods for the reliability assessment of existing road bridges based on the principles of new European standards EN Eurocodes and international documents ISO. Results of previous research projects supported by the Ministry of Transportation of the Czech Republic (MD CR) and also other available sources will be taken into account. The partial safety factors, given in EN Eurocodes for structural design by conservative values, will be modified for the conditions of existing bridge structures, using probabilistic methods. Advanced procedures for the assessment of characteristic and design values of basic variables on the basis of test results will be proposed. Application rules for specification of target reliability levels existing bridges; assessment; reliability; EN Eurocodes; partial safety factors; remaining working life; target reliability level; probabilistic optimisation	Advanced methods for reliability assessment of existing road bridges Simplified conservative procedures for the reliability assessment of existing bridges based on the methods applied for the design of new structures may lead to expensive and time-consuming repairs of bridges. Therefore, the proposed project is focused onthe development of advanced methods for the reliability assessment of existing road bridges based on the principles of new European standards EN Eurocodes and international documents ISO. Results of previous research projects supported by the Ministry of Transportation of the Czech Republic (MD CR) and also other available sources will be taken into account. The partial safety factors, given in EN Eurocodes for structural design by conservative values, will be modified for the conditions of existing bridge structures, using probabilistic methods. Advanced procedures for the assessment of characteristic and design values of basic variables on the basis of test results will be proposed. Application rules for specification of target reliability levels existing bridges; assessment; reliability; EN Eurocodes; partial safety factors; remaining working life; target reliability level; probabilistic optimisation
Methodology Proposal of Index Benchmarking for Logistic Centres The purpose of project Methodology Proposal of Index Benchmarking for Logistic Centres is to ensure improving of critical areas, which could threaten particular logistic centres, and then strengthen areas in which czech logistic centres surpass others. Benchmarking analysis will enable to czech logistic centres comparison of competitive centres inland, in Europe and the whole world. benchmarking; logistic centre; transport	Methodology Proposal of Index Benchmarking for Logistic Centres The purpose of project Methodology Proposal of Index Benchmarking for Logistic Centres is to ensure improving of critical areas, which could threaten particular logistic centres, and then strengthen areas in which czech logistic centres surpass others. Benchmarking analysis will enable to czech logistic centres comparison of competitive centres inland, in Europe and the whole world. benchmarking; logistic centre; transport
The technical support for public administration decision making in the area of public bus transport in company with planning and modelling of demonstrable hauliers financial loss, live cycle cost, evaluation of adequacy and vehicles quality. The instrument of sustainable extend of traffic is planed and controlled extend of public transport system making use of Integrated Transport Systems. Public transport operation within commitment to public services is reimbursed from public purse. The expenses on inhabitants mobility ensuring are different in different locality, depending on a quality of provided service and quite a number of additional objective influences. The project is aimed to a real SW modelling of accumulated costs on the operability of traffic technique in a costing model format which works with a structure of operation and economical indicators as a data information form haulers for that are also made evaluation of statistic credibility. The project is going to objectively evaluate an impact of objective conditions against vehicle costs in real conditions in real hauler. The universal outcomes will be exercisable within evaluation of final costs, operation and economical indicators of bus public transport in the Czech Repu operational parameters; total costs calculation model; cost formula; life cycle	The technical support for public administration decision making in the area of public bus transport in company with planning and modelling of demonstrable hauliers financial loss, live cycle cost, evaluation of adequacy and vehicles quality. The instrument of sustainable extend of traffic is planed and controlled extend of public transport system making use of Integrated Transport Systems. Public transport operation within commitment to public services is reimbursed from public purse. The expenses on inhabitants mobility ensuring are different in different locality, depending on a quality of provided service and quite a number of additional objective influences. The project is aimed to a real SW modelling of accumulated costs on the operability of traffic technique in a costing model format which works with a structure of operation and economical indicators as a data information form haulers for that are also made evaluation of statistic credibility. The project is going to objectively evaluate an impact of objective conditions against vehicle costs in real conditions in real hauler. The universal outcomes will be exercisable within evaluation of final costs, operation and economical indicators of bus public transport in the Czech Repu operational parameters; total costs calculation model; cost formula; life cycle
Research on the the input parameters for the effective modelling and simulation of the ITS services based on the variable message signs in the conditions of the Czech Republic. Project is dealing with one of important aspects of VMS-based ITS applications' modelling/simulation. For this purposes is necessary to identify so called driver-acceptance parameters which mean the ratio of driver acceptance related to the particular ITS system. The aim of this project is to identify these parameters in the conditions of the Czech Republic and enable realistic SW modelling/simulation of VMS based ITS applications. ITS simulation; modelling; driver-acceptance; input parameters	Research on the the input parameters for the effective modelling and simulation of the ITS services based on the variable message signs in the conditions of the Czech Republic. Project is dealing with one of important aspects of VMS-based ITS applications' modelling/simulation. For this purposes is necessary to identify so called driver-acceptance parameters which mean the ratio of driver acceptance related to the particular ITS system. The aim of this project is to identify these parameters in the conditions of the Czech Republic and enable realistic SW modelling/simulation of VMS based ITS applications. ITS simulation; modelling; driver-acceptance; input parameters
Investment optimation for nature protection during building and reconstruction of road and railway infrastructure in the Czech Republic The part of on going investment venture of building a reconstruction on transport infrastructure is also building of equipment decreasing effect of transportation to the environment and human health. The economic point of view is very complex problem. Often it shows there are very wideband investments on the similar equipment in the different site and usefulness of the equipment does not exist. Our experiences give us theory there is big gap for optimalization of economic investments according observance of standards for environment and human protection. The project brings basic solving of the theory. The project will focus on economic analyzes (cost-benefit, cost-effectiveness) of investment to equipments on transport infrastructure. Project outcomeswill be the Methodology of investment optimation for nature protection during building and reconstruction of road and railway infrastructure in the Czech Republic. Internalization; measures; environment; economic efficiency; transport infrastructure	Investment optimation for nature protection during building and reconstruction of road and railway infrastructure in the Czech Republic The part of on going investment venture of building a reconstruction on transport infrastructure is also building of equipment decreasing effect of transportation to the environment and human health. The economic point of view is very complex problem. Often it shows there are very wideband investments on the similar equipment in the different site and usefulness of the equipment does not exist. Our experiences give us theory there is big gap for optimalization of economic investments according observance of standards for environment and human protection. The project brings basic solving of the theory. The project will focus on economic analyzes (cost-benefit, cost-effectiveness) of investment to equipments on transport infrastructure. Project outcomeswill be the Methodology of investment optimation for nature protection during building and reconstruction of road and railway infrastructure in the Czech Republic. Internalization; measures; environment; economic efficiency; transport infrastructure
Evaluation of Traffic Diversion Routes of D1 The purpose of the project is to choose and verify routs round highway D1 which could by use as traffic diversion routes of D1 for various type of vehicles. Traffic; Diversion; Highway; D1; optimalization; traffic; modelling; GIS; network; data; map	Evaluation of Traffic Diversion Routes of D1 The purpose of the project is to choose and verify routs round highway D1 which could by use as traffic diversion routes of D1 for various type of vehicles. Traffic; Diversion; Highway; D1; optimalization; traffic; modelling; GIS; network; data; map
Implementation methodology and possible variants when building a net of ITS stations to use for strategic management of traffic flow on all major roads of CR. The project will map Intelligent Transport Systems in the Europe and in the world, which are using for implementation of effective ITS stations and then for traffic flow management. Process and psychological analysis will be done and customer needs willbe collected. The system architecture will be designed at the results of previous steps. Specific application for effective ITS stations with possibilities of overweight vehicles selection will be designed on the basis of system architecture. Selected application will be pilot tested and evaluated. ITS station; traffic flow; sensors; traffic management	Implementation methodology and possible variants when building a net of ITS stations to use for strategic management of traffic flow on all major roads of CR. The project will map Intelligent Transport Systems in the Europe and in the world, which are using for implementation of effective ITS stations and then for traffic flow management. Process and psychological analysis will be done and customer needs willbe collected. The system architecture will be designed at the results of previous steps. Specific application for effective ITS stations with possibilities of overweight vehicles selection will be designed on the basis of system architecture. Selected application will be pilot tested and evaluated. ITS station; traffic flow; sensors; traffic management
Research of eCall system architecture Matter of project is extension of eCall system, its connection to telematic services providers, system architecture, full set of data and pilot test. eCall; full; set; data; system; architecture; telematic; services; providers	Research of eCall system architecture Matter of project is extension of eCall system, its connection to telematic services providers, system architecture, full set of data and pilot test. eCall; full; set; data; system; architecture; telematic; services; providers
Methods and tools for detection and prevention of driver attention decreases For very many processes of interaction between human subject and artificial system the factor of reliability belongs to the most important. This concerns mainly the human part of such interactions, because, while the reliability of artificial systems andtheir components has increased pretty much in recent years, the reliability of human factor in these interactions remain all the time almost the same. More precisely: on one side we have reached some success in improving the human subject reactions reliability due various advanced trainings, better psychological, neurological investigations and medical care in general, but on the other side the contemporary system operators have to deal usually with much complicated systems than formerly, which requiremuch more precise, fast and reliable reactions. Also the losses caused by the eventual decreases of interaction reliability are at present much higher and severe than in the past. If we have the transportation systems on our mind, we easy Interaction driver-car; reliability; attention; micro-sleep; accident rate; bio-feedback; simulators; virtual reality; vehicle cockpit optimization; asistence systems	Methods and tools for detection and prevention of driver attention decreases For very many processes of interaction between human subject and artificial system the factor of reliability belongs to the most important. This concerns mainly the human part of such interactions, because, while the reliability of artificial systems andtheir components has increased pretty much in recent years, the reliability of human factor in these interactions remain all the time almost the same. More precisely: on one side we have reached some success in improving the human subject reactions reliability due various advanced trainings, better psychological, neurological investigations and medical care in general, but on the other side the contemporary system operators have to deal usually with much complicated systems than formerly, which requiremuch more precise, fast and reliable reactions. Also the losses caused by the eventual decreases of interaction reliability are at present much higher and severe than in the past. If we have the transportation systems on our mind, we easy Interaction driver-car; reliability; attention; micro-sleep; accident rate; bio-feedback; simulators; virtual reality; vehicle cockpit optimization; asistence systems
Proposal for railway emergency infrastructure maintenance and renewal contract system development with the support of information systems, which would be usable for solution of crisis situations The main purpose of the research is, in accordance with new conditions and development trends in railway transport, the improvement of the quality of the Czech Republic?s preparedness for the solution of all crisis states happening to railway infrastructure, especially to the crisis infrastructure. This can be achieved by a radical change of the present system altogether with assurance of the system?s efficiency improvement. Operationality improvement, preparedness and significant savings will be clearproof of systematic participation of entrepreneurial subjects operating in transport construction engineering, as well as of assurance of the usage of newly designed emergency resources? structure during all crisis states. Railway emergency infrastructure; crisis state; crisis management; operational preparation of state?s territory; risk; activation; plan; railway technical protection and renewal; economic mobilization; temporary railway bridge structures; emergency supp	Proposal for railway emergency infrastructure maintenance and renewal contract system development with the support of information systems, which would be usable for solution of crisis situations The main purpose of the research is, in accordance with new conditions and development trends in railway transport, the improvement of the quality of the Czech Republic?s preparedness for the solution of all crisis states happening to railway infrastructure, especially to the crisis infrastructure. This can be achieved by a radical change of the present system altogether with assurance of the system?s efficiency improvement. Operationality improvement, preparedness and significant savings will be clearproof of systematic participation of entrepreneurial subjects operating in transport construction engineering, as well as of assurance of the usage of newly designed emergency resources? structure during all crisis states. Railway emergency infrastructure; crisis state; crisis management; operational preparation of state?s territory; risk; activation; plan; railway technical protection and renewal; economic mobilization; temporary railway bridge structures; emergency supp
The economy of integrated transport system?s operation as the fundamental instrument for the unification of conditions in a public transport of persons and for the realization of cross-regional integration. The research project will solve economy rules in public transport of persons as a fundamental headstone enabling the following system unification and operational effectiveness?s improvement in public transport of persons. Specific attention will be devoted to the area of tariff conditions that is the clue for design of cross-regional integration. Project will map evincible losses in public transport. economy of operation; public transport of persons; cross-regional integration; operational effectiveness; tariff conditions	The economy of integrated transport system?s operation as the fundamental instrument for the unification of conditions in a public transport of persons and for the realization of cross-regional integration. The research project will solve economy rules in public transport of persons as a fundamental headstone enabling the following system unification and operational effectiveness?s improvement in public transport of persons. Specific attention will be devoted to the area of tariff conditions that is the clue for design of cross-regional integration. Project will map evincible losses in public transport. economy of operation; public transport of persons; cross-regional integration; operational effectiveness; tariff conditions
The highway runoff control and assesment of pollution retention efficiency by soil infiltration using decentralised drainage system. This project aims on highways runoff and water pollution control on the highways in the Czech Republic. There are also solved possibilities of pollutants elimination realized by the soil infiltration. This project proposal is continuing and supplementaryresearch to the present project (2005-2007), which deals with the rainfall ? outflow condition on the highways and motorways with impact on waterbodies. The working team is formed by experts from Water research institute T.G.M, branch Brno and JV PPROJEKT VH dealing with water management project. highway runoff; water quality control; polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon; toxic metals; oil substances; toxicity; higway sewer objects; decentralised drainage system; infiltration; soil; traffic intensity	The highway runoff control and assesment of pollution retention efficiency by soil infiltration using decentralised drainage system. This project aims on highways runoff and water pollution control on the highways in the Czech Republic. There are also solved possibilities of pollutants elimination realized by the soil infiltration. This project proposal is continuing and supplementaryresearch to the present project (2005-2007), which deals with the rainfall ? outflow condition on the highways and motorways with impact on waterbodies. The working team is formed by experts from Water research institute T.G.M, branch Brno and JV PPROJEKT VH dealing with water management project. highway runoff; water quality control; polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon; toxic metals; oil substances; toxicity; higway sewer objects; decentralised drainage system; infiltration; soil; traffic intensity
Railway infrastructure charges from the view of its competiveness in an international transport market Project focuses on a model development and a railway infrastructure charges level to stimulate transport companies to prefer a more ecological railway transport. railway infrastructure charges; railway transport	Railway infrastructure charges from the view of its competiveness in an international transport market Project focuses on a model development and a railway infrastructure charges level to stimulate transport companies to prefer a more ecological railway transport. railway infrastructure charges; railway transport
Research on possiblities of implementation of European parliament and council directive 2006/126/ES into the Czech legislative system. Proposal and imlementacion direction 2006/126/EU for education driving school teachers and driving examiners. Direction 2006/126/EU; education program for driving school instructors; education program for driving examiners	Research on possiblities of implementation of European parliament and council directive 2006/126/ES into the Czech legislative system. Proposal and imlementacion direction 2006/126/EU for education driving school teachers and driving examiners. Direction 2006/126/EU; education program for driving school instructors; education program for driving examiners
Special conditions for transaction of the protections, maintaining and revivals on surface routes in Czech republic behind emergency legislation. The subject of the research project solution is the current conditions and requirements for the emergency preparedness of the state administration, self-administration and other involved bodies and organisations related to protection, maintenance and rehabilitation of highways in emergency conditions. The primary foundation for improving the quality of emergency preparedness is understanding of new legislative, organisational, economical and technical requirements and their implementation into the planning and controlling documents that provide necessary emergency works and services in transport infrastructure in emergency conditions. The other subject of the research project solution is the evaluation of the current needs for the provision of protection, maintenance and rehabilitation of highways from the resources point of view. It means mainly knowing and understanding the quality of human resources, technical means and reserves of renewable materials, which have to comply with the usage condition highways; maintenance; protection; rehabilitation; emergency conditions; emergency preparedness; emergency; emergency plan; network ACR; training requirements; emergency bridge; human source; emergency information system; transport infrastructure; priv	Special conditions for transaction of the protections, maintaining and revivals on surface routes in Czech republic behind emergency legislation. The subject of the research project solution is the current conditions and requirements for the emergency preparedness of the state administration, self-administration and other involved bodies and organisations related to protection, maintenance and rehabilitation of highways in emergency conditions. The primary foundation for improving the quality of emergency preparedness is understanding of new legislative, organisational, economical and technical requirements and their implementation into the planning and controlling documents that provide necessary emergency works and services in transport infrastructure in emergency conditions. The other subject of the research project solution is the evaluation of the current needs for the provision of protection, maintenance and rehabilitation of highways from the resources point of view. It means mainly knowing and understanding the quality of human resources, technical means and reserves of renewable materials, which have to comply with the usage condition highways; maintenance; protection; rehabilitation; emergency conditions; emergency preparedness; emergency; emergency plan; network ACR; training requirements; emergency bridge; human source; emergency information system; transport infrastructure; priv
Information system for road administrators on the base of roadsafety inspection and road safety information. Unification of implementation of road safety inspections in the Czech Republic using GIS. Road safety inspection; Global Network; record of road equipmet; information system	Information system for road administrators on the base of roadsafety inspection and road safety information. Unification of implementation of road safety inspections in the Czech Republic using GIS. Road safety inspection; Global Network; record of road equipmet; information system
Comparison of local and regional railways and road transport from the point of view of enviromnmental influencs and decrease of needs of energy and possibility of public financing. Project is concentrated to solve the comparison of specific consumption and specific emissions of greenhouse gases of vehicles of railway and road transport per passenger/tonne carried. At the end of works it is supposed the proposal for optimisation ofoperations, inclusive proposals for efficient transport services in selected regions. Results will be presented in form of tables, nomographic charts and software products used in decision making processes of authorities of state and public administration to solve efficient methods for operation of transport services using integrated transport systems within the framework of trends of the transport policy EU. Transport; environment; Optimization; modal; split; transport; Minimisation; fuel; consumption; Minimisation; emissions; exhalations; Optimisation; modal; split; regional; traffic	Comparison of local and regional railways and road transport from the point of view of enviromnmental influencs and decrease of needs of energy and possibility of public financing. Project is concentrated to solve the comparison of specific consumption and specific emissions of greenhouse gases of vehicles of railway and road transport per passenger/tonne carried. At the end of works it is supposed the proposal for optimisation ofoperations, inclusive proposals for efficient transport services in selected regions. Results will be presented in form of tables, nomographic charts and software products used in decision making processes of authorities of state and public administration to solve efficient methods for operation of transport services using integrated transport systems within the framework of trends of the transport policy EU. Transport; environment; Optimization; modal; split; transport; Minimisation; fuel; consumption; Minimisation; emissions; exhalations; Optimisation; modal; split; regional; traffic
Process, safety, legislative, and operational questions of the new telematics applications in the road transport. Using of all information resources of the new ITS applications in road transport as EFC, image data using etc. for the purpose of service creation in ITS architecture. Elimination of users procedures leading to the systems dysfunction of electronical infrastructure payment with using GNSS. The project is also aimed on proposals of measures on technical, technological and legislative level. ITS architecture; traffic data; EFC	Process, safety, legislative, and operational questions of the new telematics applications in the road transport. Using of all information resources of the new ITS applications in road transport as EFC, image data using etc. for the purpose of service creation in ITS architecture. Elimination of users procedures leading to the systems dysfunction of electronical infrastructure payment with using GNSS. The project is also aimed on proposals of measures on technical, technological and legislative level. ITS architecture; traffic data; EFC
The importance of cambioxylophagous fauna of Norway spruce in region with basic population level of bark beetle (Ips typographus) Pattern of camboxylophagous fauna of Norway spruce in stands with basic population level of bark beetle (Ips typographus) is studied in the Beskydy territory. The project deals with developing of cambioxylophages on logging debris, its atractivity and threaten for spruce stand. An importance of cambioxylophages in gradology, site factors and stand conditions and its importance for developing and disturbance of ecology stability of forest ecosystems in Beskyds is the aim of the project. Kambioxylofagové; smrk; Beskydy Mts; gradologie; těžební odpad; stanovištní a porostní podmínky	The importance of cambioxylophagous fauna of Norway spruce in region with basic population level of bark beetle (Ips typographus) Pattern of camboxylophagous fauna of Norway spruce in stands with basic population level of bark beetle (Ips typographus) is studied in the Beskydy territory. The project deals with developing of cambioxylophages on logging debris, its atractivity and threaten for spruce stand. An importance of cambioxylophages in gradology, site factors and stand conditions and its importance for developing and disturbance of ecology stability of forest ecosystems in Beskyds is the aim of the project. Kambioxylofagové; smrk; Beskydy Mts; gradologie; těžební odpad; stanovištní a porostní podmínky
An importantce of birch for permanently development in eastern Krušné hory Mts. Project deals with the factors affecting the stability of birch stands - biotic factors (Acari, Insects), abiotics with physiology influence (frost cracks), project presents an development of stand conditions under a long time influence of air-pollutionvia changes in elements content in leaves and annimal bioindicators. bříza; Betula pendula; fauna; obsah prvků v listech; mrazové kýly; biomonitoring; Krušné hory	An importantce of birch for permanently development in eastern Krušné hory Mts. Project deals with the factors affecting the stability of birch stands - biotic factors (Acari, Insects), abiotics with physiology influence (frost cracks), project presents an development of stand conditions under a long time influence of air-pollutionvia changes in elements content in leaves and annimal bioindicators. bříza; Betula pendula; fauna; obsah prvků v listech; mrazové kýly; biomonitoring; Krušné hory
Comprehensive raising of Czech beekeeping management in condition of world crisis owing to Varroa disease. Topics of project are new knowledge and skills in control of resistant population of Varroa mite, monitoring of AFB (American foulbrood), hygienic friendly control of other bee diseases, minimalization of damages of agrochemicals on bees, new strong parameters for evaluation of superior honey, feeding, wintering, disinfection in beekeeping and in manufacturing, storage, packing and quality control of bee products and new knowledge about ethology of wild living bumblebees. Včela medonosná; čmelák; včelařství; Varroa destructor; mor včelího plodu; pesticidy; rezistence; chemoterapie; intoxikace; med; kontrola kvality	Comprehensive raising of Czech beekeeping management in condition of world crisis owing to Varroa disease. Topics of project are new knowledge and skills in control of resistant population of Varroa mite, monitoring of AFB (American foulbrood), hygienic friendly control of other bee diseases, minimalization of damages of agrochemicals on bees, new strong parameters for evaluation of superior honey, feeding, wintering, disinfection in beekeeping and in manufacturing, storage, packing and quality control of bee products and new knowledge about ethology of wild living bumblebees. Včela medonosná; čmelák; včelařství; Varroa destructor; mor včelího plodu; pesticidy; rezistence; chemoterapie; intoxikace; med; kontrola kvality
Introduction of new traits for quality and stability improving in variety production of selected leguminous species by hybridization methods The objective of the project is to study the possibilities of new methods application for the introduction of desired traits into cultural species Trifolium pratense and Lotus corniculatus. The aim of the proposed project is to elaborate procedures for overcoming post-fertilization barriers of crossability after interspecific hybridization by in vitro methods. During the project, new original breeding material will be obtained with characteristics such as increasing tolerance to Fusarium spp., BYMV andwith higher persistence in red clover and improved pod indehiscence in birdsfoot trefoil. Trifolium; Lotus; mezidruhová hybridizace; postzygotické bariéry; embryokultury; BYMV; Fusarium; vytrvalost; nepukavost	Introduction of new traits for quality and stability improving in variety production of selected leguminous species by hybridization methods The objective of the project is to study the possibilities of new methods application for the introduction of desired traits into cultural species Trifolium pratense and Lotus corniculatus. The aim of the proposed project is to elaborate procedures for overcoming post-fertilization barriers of crossability after interspecific hybridization by in vitro methods. During the project, new original breeding material will be obtained with characteristics such as increasing tolerance to Fusarium spp., BYMV andwith higher persistence in red clover and improved pod indehiscence in birdsfoot trefoil. Trifolium; Lotus; mezidruhová hybridizace; postzygotické bariéry; embryokultury; BYMV; Fusarium; vytrvalost; nepukavost
Innovation of Water Treatment Process and Guarding of high Quality of Drinking Water in Water Distribution Systems Todays research in water treatment deals mainly with optimalization of operations control of concurrently water treatmetn plants and reduction of desinfection byproducts. Effect of water quality depends upon different processes which are in framewok of water captation, water treatment and distribution. Last years are for an approximation nonlinear systems used neuronal networks which are able to describe a legalities of investigated processes. By a transport of drinking water in distribution networks under a specific conditions are detected various chemical and biological phenomenas. Impacts of these processes on water quality are mostly negative. Free chlorine could be consumed with an organic matter and various precursors. Therefore is very importantto know water duration time in drinking water distribution system. Whis this is importent to compile a water network hydraulic model. Outcome of this projekt is even a complex evaluation of variable problems affecting drinking water quality and proposal úprava vody; distribuční system; pitná voda; kvalita; koroze; volný chlor	Innovation of Water Treatment Process and Guarding of high Quality of Drinking Water in Water Distribution Systems Todays research in water treatment deals mainly with optimalization of operations control of concurrently water treatmetn plants and reduction of desinfection byproducts. Effect of water quality depends upon different processes which are in framewok of water captation, water treatment and distribution. Last years are for an approximation nonlinear systems used neuronal networks which are able to describe a legalities of investigated processes. By a transport of drinking water in distribution networks under a specific conditions are detected various chemical and biological phenomenas. Impacts of these processes on water quality are mostly negative. Free chlorine could be consumed with an organic matter and various precursors. Therefore is very importantto know water duration time in drinking water distribution system. Whis this is importent to compile a water network hydraulic model. Outcome of this projekt is even a complex evaluation of variable problems affecting drinking water quality and proposal úprava vody; distribuční system; pitná voda; kvalita; koroze; volný chlor
TECHNOLOGY AND TECHNOLGICAL SYSTEMS GROWING SUGARBEET FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE. Project working out problems prosecution sugarbeet without ploughing. Project coming-out from two basic variants prosecution sugarbeet (with ploughing and without ploughing). In the new silvicultural technology there will check new machines and sets andthere will interpretation energetic and their setting. At the same time they will assess economic evaluation of both variants prosecution sugarbeet. New silvicultural technology is solving in terms of problems preservation healthy state soil. minimalizace; technologie; cukrovka; soupravy; energetická náročnost; ekonomika; zdravá půda	TECHNOLOGY AND TECHNOLGICAL SYSTEMS GROWING SUGARBEET FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE. Project working out problems prosecution sugarbeet without ploughing. Project coming-out from two basic variants prosecution sugarbeet (with ploughing and without ploughing). In the new silvicultural technology there will check new machines and sets andthere will interpretation energetic and their setting. At the same time they will assess economic evaluation of both variants prosecution sugarbeet. New silvicultural technology is solving in terms of problems preservation healthy state soil. minimalizace; technologie; cukrovka; soupravy; energetická náročnost; ekonomika; zdravá půda
Monitoring and evaluation of extreme runoff conditions in catchments of small streams, focused on prevention and mitigation of flood damages. Acting in response to variations of weather in last few years, it is necessary to focus on the processes occurring in the catchments of small streams. The damages caused by the extreme flood phenomena should be avoided as far as possible. At present, itis not possible to exclude the extreme flood events altogether. An efficient flood protection is therefore one of important goals of decision making in landscape management. The catchments of small streams contribute substantially to the creation of floodepisodes. They are the primary spots on which the global runoff is generated in the first instance. This fact must be taken into account for the system of flood protection of the Czech Republic territory to be efficient. It is therefore absolutely necessary to improve the monitoring and to carry out well-focused flood control and erosion control measures in the catchments of small streams. Vodní režim; povodí; odtok; srážky; monitoring; extrémní jev; hydrologický model; varovný systém	Monitoring and evaluation of extreme runoff conditions in catchments of small streams, focused on prevention and mitigation of flood damages. Acting in response to variations of weather in last few years, it is necessary to focus on the processes occurring in the catchments of small streams. The damages caused by the extreme flood phenomena should be avoided as far as possible. At present, itis not possible to exclude the extreme flood events altogether. An efficient flood protection is therefore one of important goals of decision making in landscape management. The catchments of small streams contribute substantially to the creation of floodepisodes. They are the primary spots on which the global runoff is generated in the first instance. This fact must be taken into account for the system of flood protection of the Czech Republic territory to be efficient. It is therefore absolutely necessary to improve the monitoring and to carry out well-focused flood control and erosion control measures in the catchments of small streams. Vodní režim; povodí; odtok; srážky; monitoring; extrémní jev; hydrologický model; varovný systém
Molecular biological analysis of inland (Czech) stocks of lactic acid bacteria production strains. The aim of the project is the utilization of molecular biological methods for identification and characterization of lactic acid bacteria (genus Lactobacillus) for purposes of their law protection on the dairy products market. Lactobacillus; molekulární diagnostika; PCR-ARDRA; RAPD; REP-PCR; SDS-PAGE	Molecular biological analysis of inland (Czech) stocks of lactic acid bacteria production strains. The aim of the project is the utilization of molecular biological methods for identification and characterization of lactic acid bacteria (genus Lactobacillus) for purposes of their law protection on the dairy products market. Lactobacillus; molekulární diagnostika; PCR-ARDRA; RAPD; REP-PCR; SDS-PAGE
Methods of thermal inactivation of microorganisms in particular foods The aim of the project is the heat treatment of particular foods to inactivate present microorganisms and origins of pests at minimum changes of quality. The unique pilot unit is utilised for the project which enables the application of dry heat at conditions of intensified heating and scraping of heat surface. tepelná inaktivace mikroorganismů; partikulární potraviny; změna kvality; nutriční hodnocení	Methods of thermal inactivation of microorganisms in particular foods The aim of the project is the heat treatment of particular foods to inactivate present microorganisms and origins of pests at minimum changes of quality. The unique pilot unit is utilised for the project which enables the application of dry heat at conditions of intensified heating and scraping of heat surface. tepelná inaktivace mikroorganismů; partikulární potraviny; změna kvality; nutriční hodnocení
Possibilities of limiting the drought impact by optimizing management practices in some field crops The extreme meteorological events occurring over the last years have significantly influenced the agricultural production in the Czech Republic. A number of specialists are of the opinion that these are effects of climatic change. Under the warmest conditions on extremely light or heavy soils, such locations, where economic effectiveness will be difficult to achieve, are expected to occur. The most affected locations will be those at lower altitudes that are supposed to suffer from more frequent meteorological drought events, which could negatively influence the yield level in our most fertile regions. Therefore, it is necessary to limit drought effects using some agronomic treatments. The objective of the project is to optimize the so-called crop management practices modified according to soil and climatic conditions that are not sufficiently considered in our country. Various farming systems and soil tillage practices will be comprehensively evaluated for selected crops under drier conditions in fie sucho; meteorologie; pěstební technologie; zpracování půdy; obilniny; kukuřice saflor; choroby; škůdci; plevele	Possibilities of limiting the drought impact by optimizing management practices in some field crops The extreme meteorological events occurring over the last years have significantly influenced the agricultural production in the Czech Republic. A number of specialists are of the opinion that these are effects of climatic change. Under the warmest conditions on extremely light or heavy soils, such locations, where economic effectiveness will be difficult to achieve, are expected to occur. The most affected locations will be those at lower altitudes that are supposed to suffer from more frequent meteorological drought events, which could negatively influence the yield level in our most fertile regions. Therefore, it is necessary to limit drought effects using some agronomic treatments. The objective of the project is to optimize the so-called crop management practices modified according to soil and climatic conditions that are not sufficiently considered in our country. Various farming systems and soil tillage practices will be comprehensively evaluated for selected crops under drier conditions in fie sucho; meteorologie; pěstební technologie; zpracování půdy; obilniny; kukuřice saflor; choroby; škůdci; plevele
Enhancement of competition ability of potato growers due to tuber production with higher consumption quality. Potato production technologies will be innovated to achieve their higher consumer quality, namely by increasing selenium content of potato tubers, finding ways significantly increasing content of polyphenols, ascorbic acid and carotenoids and minimizingtheir loss during cooking. A genotype able to utilize with higher intensity selenium applied into soil and foliar applied selenium solution will be selected. Selenium contents of raw potato tubers and after cooking (boiled potatoes, fried pommes frites) will be evaluated, namely as regard as changes in selenium content compared to initial content of raw potato tubers. Selenium content of foliage will be investigated in the framework of balance and selenium distribution in potato plants. jakost brambor; obsah selenu; obsah polyfenolů; obsah karotenoidů	Enhancement of competition ability of potato growers due to tuber production with higher consumption quality. Potato production technologies will be innovated to achieve their higher consumer quality, namely by increasing selenium content of potato tubers, finding ways significantly increasing content of polyphenols, ascorbic acid and carotenoids and minimizingtheir loss during cooking. A genotype able to utilize with higher intensity selenium applied into soil and foliar applied selenium solution will be selected. Selenium contents of raw potato tubers and after cooking (boiled potatoes, fried pommes frites) will be evaluated, namely as regard as changes in selenium content compared to initial content of raw potato tubers. Selenium content of foliage will be investigated in the framework of balance and selenium distribution in potato plants. jakost brambor; obsah selenu; obsah polyfenolů; obsah karotenoidů
The effect of quaranteen fungus Verticillium albo-atrum on our scale of hop varieties Quaranteen fungus Verticillium albo-atrum on hop wasn´t still proved in our conditions. Therefore we want examine the influence of named fungus on our scale of hop varieties and to focus also on possible system of the protection against this fungus. chmel; karanténa; Verticillium albo-atrum; biopreparáty; fungicidy; pokusy in vitro; pokusy in vivo	The effect of quaranteen fungus Verticillium albo-atrum on our scale of hop varieties Quaranteen fungus Verticillium albo-atrum on hop wasn´t still proved in our conditions. Therefore we want examine the influence of named fungus on our scale of hop varieties and to focus also on possible system of the protection against this fungus. chmel; karanténa; Verticillium albo-atrum; biopreparáty; fungicidy; pokusy in vitro; pokusy in vivo
Utilization of innovated methods and specific breeding materials to increase effectiveness of production of new winter rapeseed cultivars The project is aimed at utilization of verified and new developed biotechnological and analytic methods to increase effectiveness of breeding procedures in winter oilseed rape. The aim is to create improved materials by means of these methods for breeding lines and hybrids that could compete with foreign cultivars in important economic traits. Doubled haploid (DH) lines and hybrid materials from breeding workplaces created until now will be used. Hybrids will be produced on the base of CMS Ogu-Inra,restorers of fertility (Rf) and self-incompatible DH lines with improved 00 quality. The molecular markers of Rf gene for CMS Ogu-Inra will be developed and the method of DNA markers for self-incompatible haplotypes will be finished and verified. CMS lines Shaan 2 originated from China will be improved by means of backcrosses with donors of 00 quality. Perspective yellow-seeded DH lines will be included into performance trials. Microspore culture technique will be used as the basic method for deriving D řepka ozimá; šlechtitelské postupy; dihaploidy; cytoplazmatická samčí sterilita - CMS; autoinkompatibilita; hybridy; kvalita semen; mrazuvzdornost; resistence k chorobám; PCR; RFLP; DNA markery	Utilization of innovated methods and specific breeding materials to increase effectiveness of production of new winter rapeseed cultivars The project is aimed at utilization of verified and new developed biotechnological and analytic methods to increase effectiveness of breeding procedures in winter oilseed rape. The aim is to create improved materials by means of these methods for breeding lines and hybrids that could compete with foreign cultivars in important economic traits. Doubled haploid (DH) lines and hybrid materials from breeding workplaces created until now will be used. Hybrids will be produced on the base of CMS Ogu-Inra,restorers of fertility (Rf) and self-incompatible DH lines with improved 00 quality. The molecular markers of Rf gene for CMS Ogu-Inra will be developed and the method of DNA markers for self-incompatible haplotypes will be finished and verified. CMS lines Shaan 2 originated from China will be improved by means of backcrosses with donors of 00 quality. Perspective yellow-seeded DH lines will be included into performance trials. Microspore culture technique will be used as the basic method for deriving D řepka ozimá; šlechtitelské postupy; dihaploidy; cytoplazmatická samčí sterilita - CMS; autoinkompatibilita; hybridy; kvalita semen; mrazuvzdornost; resistence k chorobám; PCR; RFLP; DNA markery
Enhancement of the value of spring wheat, winter barley and oats collections for users and improvement of their management. Project is aimed at the enhancement of users´ value and improvement of study and management methods in spring wheat, winter barley and oats collections, which belong to the extensive collections of genetic resources (GR) in the Czech Republic. Project proceeding will be based on the gathering and processing of all available data from both, collections (pedigree data, evaluation data from information system EVIGEZ, characteristics of storage proteins and all other results of evaluation and characterization of GR) and especially on own experiments carried out within the project with model collections and other selected GR. Evaluating the model collections, phenological, morphological and agronomical characters will be studied in field trials. Also analyses of storage proteins´ spectra will be employed for characterization of GR, as wel as characterization by means of DNA markers (based mainly on the microsatelite analysis - SSR technique). Existing genetic diversity within collections will be considered genetické zdroje; core kolekce; donory znaků; genetická diversita; jarní pšenice; ozimý ječmen; oves; metody charakterizace	Enhancement of the value of spring wheat, winter barley and oats collections for users and improvement of their management. Project is aimed at the enhancement of users´ value and improvement of study and management methods in spring wheat, winter barley and oats collections, which belong to the extensive collections of genetic resources (GR) in the Czech Republic. Project proceeding will be based on the gathering and processing of all available data from both, collections (pedigree data, evaluation data from information system EVIGEZ, characteristics of storage proteins and all other results of evaluation and characterization of GR) and especially on own experiments carried out within the project with model collections and other selected GR. Evaluating the model collections, phenological, morphological and agronomical characters will be studied in field trials. Also analyses of storage proteins´ spectra will be employed for characterization of GR, as wel as characterization by means of DNA markers (based mainly on the microsatelite analysis - SSR technique). Existing genetic diversity within collections will be considered genetické zdroje; core kolekce; donory znaků; genetická diversita; jarní pšenice; ozimý ječmen; oves; metody charakterizace
Conservation of plant biodiversity in the system of sustainable agriculture and landscaping. Still existing fragments of land races and traditional obsolete cultivars, especially fruit trees will be searched for within the Czech Republic, evaluated and a project on their "in situ" conservation will be elaborated. Additional valuable land races of fruits and fiels crops from germplasm collections will be returned to culture using the "on farm" method. Selected wild, meadow and aromatic/medicinal plants will be studied and evaluated with the aim of their introduction to cultivation. Needs for "insitu" conservation for threatened species will be considered and an aimed "on farm" conservation will be realized. According to possibilities, various lost or not viable historical collected materials and land races will be repatriated form abroad. genetické zdroje; biodiversita; konzervace; in situ; on farm; ex situ; krajové formy; tradiční odrůdy; staré odrůdy; plané příbuzné druhy	Conservation of plant biodiversity in the system of sustainable agriculture and landscaping. Still existing fragments of land races and traditional obsolete cultivars, especially fruit trees will be searched for within the Czech Republic, evaluated and a project on their "in situ" conservation will be elaborated. Additional valuable land races of fruits and fiels crops from germplasm collections will be returned to culture using the "on farm" method. Selected wild, meadow and aromatic/medicinal plants will be studied and evaluated with the aim of their introduction to cultivation. Needs for "insitu" conservation for threatened species will be considered and an aimed "on farm" conservation will be realized. According to possibilities, various lost or not viable historical collected materials and land races will be repatriated form abroad. genetické zdroje; biodiversita; konzervace; in situ; on farm; ex situ; krajové formy; tradiční odrůdy; staré odrůdy; plané příbuzné druhy
Development of DNA arrays and technology application for high throughtput gene identification, genotypisation for characterisation of genetic resources, breeding materials and breeders and consumers rights protection Proposed project should be focused to development and application of DNA arrays technology for characterisation of genetic resources and breeding lines and for control purposes. DNA sequence differences among alleles present in old genetic resources, obsolete and new elite cultivars with excellent end-used quality will be identified and high throughput technologies for their detection will be developed. Molecular biology based techniques - PCR, cloning and sequencing will be used along with bio-informatic tools- in silico cloning and comparison. Genetic resources of wheat are available in gene-Bank operating within RICP Prague. Different approaches for diagnostic DNA arrays development wil be tested to develop high throughput system for genotypisation.A new theoretical knowledge on the genome structure of genetic resources and variability wihin them will be developed as well as methodological approach, which can be further used for identification and improvement of important plant species. The proj DNA pole; DNA fingerprinting; pšenice; vysoko kapacitní technologie; šlechtění; šlechtění pomocí markérů; kontrola; gen; alela; identifikace	Development of DNA arrays and technology application for high throughtput gene identification, genotypisation for characterisation of genetic resources, breeding materials and breeders and consumers rights protection Proposed project should be focused to development and application of DNA arrays technology for characterisation of genetic resources and breeding lines and for control purposes. DNA sequence differences among alleles present in old genetic resources, obsolete and new elite cultivars with excellent end-used quality will be identified and high throughput technologies for their detection will be developed. Molecular biology based techniques - PCR, cloning and sequencing will be used along with bio-informatic tools- in silico cloning and comparison. Genetic resources of wheat are available in gene-Bank operating within RICP Prague. Different approaches for diagnostic DNA arrays development wil be tested to develop high throughput system for genotypisation.A new theoretical knowledge on the genome structure of genetic resources and variability wihin them will be developed as well as methodological approach, which can be further used for identification and improvement of important plant species. The proj DNA pole; DNA fingerprinting; pšenice; vysoko kapacitní technologie; šlechtění; šlechtění pomocí markérů; kontrola; gen; alela; identifikace
Integrated growing of apples aimed to production of a safe baby food This project is concerned with the innovation of agricultural practices applied in Czech republic for growing of apples. The main aim of the planned experiments is to obtain high quality crops suitable for the production of safe baby food, i.e. free of violative levels of mycotoxins and pesticide residues not exceeding 0.01 mg/kg (this strict hygienic limit has recently been established by EU Committee, Commission Directive 1999/50/EC and adopted in CR within the process of legislation harmonization). The crops obtained from two different farming systems will be examined for the levels of the above mentioned contaminants. Based on the analytical data, relevant modifications of particular sytem will be tested in order to identify growing technology yielding the crop most suitable as a raw material for baby food production. The dynamics of pesticide residue occurrence after treatment and during post-harvest storage of crops will be recorded. Apple varieties differing in their resistance to apple scab wi Integrovaná produkce jablek; bezpečnost potravin; dětská výživa; rezidua pesticidů; metody analýzy	Integrated growing of apples aimed to production of a safe baby food This project is concerned with the innovation of agricultural practices applied in Czech republic for growing of apples. The main aim of the planned experiments is to obtain high quality crops suitable for the production of safe baby food, i.e. free of violative levels of mycotoxins and pesticide residues not exceeding 0.01 mg/kg (this strict hygienic limit has recently been established by EU Committee, Commission Directive 1999/50/EC and adopted in CR within the process of legislation harmonization). The crops obtained from two different farming systems will be examined for the levels of the above mentioned contaminants. Based on the analytical data, relevant modifications of particular sytem will be tested in order to identify growing technology yielding the crop most suitable as a raw material for baby food production. The dynamics of pesticide residue occurrence after treatment and during post-harvest storage of crops will be recorded. Apple varieties differing in their resistance to apple scab wi Integrovaná produkce jablek; bezpečnost potravin; dětská výživa; rezidua pesticidů; metody analýzy
Technological systems and economy of integrated production of vegetable and vine. Recommended growing and technological systems of vine and selected sorts of vegetable cultivation. Technological systems, recomended technical provision of operations, costs and yields, economical effectiveness of crops and benefit for agricultural enterprise. Balance sheet and utilization of waste from vine and vegetable growing. Zemědělský podnik; technologické systémy; réva vinná; zelenina; ekonomika produktu; využití odpadů	Technological systems and economy of integrated production of vegetable and vine. Recommended growing and technological systems of vine and selected sorts of vegetable cultivation. Technological systems, recomended technical provision of operations, costs and yields, economical effectiveness of crops and benefit for agricultural enterprise. Balance sheet and utilization of waste from vine and vegetable growing. Zemědělský podnik; technologické systémy; réva vinná; zelenina; ekonomika produktu; využití odpadů
The use of the biological active natural origin substances for the increasing efficiency of the controlled reproduction in pigs. The main target of the project is to get new informations in this topics: 1.The use of the natural aditives for increasing of efficiency of the diluents in the artifical insemination in pigs for short-term and cryoconservation. 2.The efficiency of thenatural aditives for the feeding of the boars. 3.The efficiency of the natural aditives for the feeding of the gilts. 4.The methods of the practical use of the natural aditives in pig production. kanec; prasnička; umělá inseminace; embryo; reprodukce; výživa	The use of the biological active natural origin substances for the increasing efficiency of the controlled reproduction in pigs. The main target of the project is to get new informations in this topics: 1.The use of the natural aditives for increasing of efficiency of the diluents in the artifical insemination in pigs for short-term and cryoconservation. 2.The efficiency of thenatural aditives for the feeding of the boars. 3.The efficiency of the natural aditives for the feeding of the gilts. 4.The methods of the practical use of the natural aditives in pig production. kanec; prasnička; umělá inseminace; embryo; reprodukce; výživa
Strategy of dairy cows breeding under competetive conditions. Project pays particular attention to the statement of conditions of effective breeding of dairy cows with average yield about 10 000 kg of milk with respect to herd breeding and management, nutrition and feeding, comfortable housing, stress elimination and welfare conditions, health problems especially problems of reproduction, milk quality and economy of production and its optimization. Results will answer the questions of usefulness respectively production optimization of high yielding herds in the Czech Republic conditions. skot; dojnice; tvorba stáda; šlechtění; výživa; komfortní ustájení; zdraví; kvalita mléka; ekonomika	Strategy of dairy cows breeding under competetive conditions. Project pays particular attention to the statement of conditions of effective breeding of dairy cows with average yield about 10 000 kg of milk with respect to herd breeding and management, nutrition and feeding, comfortable housing, stress elimination and welfare conditions, health problems especially problems of reproduction, milk quality and economy of production and its optimization. Results will answer the questions of usefulness respectively production optimization of high yielding herds in the Czech Republic conditions. skot; dojnice; tvorba stáda; šlechtění; výživa; komfortní ustájení; zdraví; kvalita mléka; ekonomika
Use of breeding and improvement methods in testing of forest tree species reproductive material sources. Use of breeding and improvement methods in testing of Norway spruce, Scots pine and European larch reproductive material sources, this is a subject of proposed research project. Results obtained will be used for preparation of proposals to enlist the best variants into category of tested (verified) sources of reproductive material. As for practical realization of obtained results, it will also be realized individual selection in the frame of tested populations of Norway spruce, Scots pine and European larch as the base for creation of synthetic cultivars of positively verified populations. Realization of proposed project is in accordance with the Czech Republic relevant compulsory provision, following the European Union legislative about management anduse of forest tree species reproductive material sources. Lesní dřeviny; smrk ztepilý; borovice lesní; modřín opadavý; zdroje reprodukčního materiálu; ověřování a testování; uznané porosty; semenné sady; kategorie testovaných (ověřených) zdrojů reprodukčního materiálu; tvorba syntetických populací pozitivně ově	Use of breeding and improvement methods in testing of forest tree species reproductive material sources. Use of breeding and improvement methods in testing of Norway spruce, Scots pine and European larch reproductive material sources, this is a subject of proposed research project. Results obtained will be used for preparation of proposals to enlist the best variants into category of tested (verified) sources of reproductive material. As for practical realization of obtained results, it will also be realized individual selection in the frame of tested populations of Norway spruce, Scots pine and European larch as the base for creation of synthetic cultivars of positively verified populations. Realization of proposed project is in accordance with the Czech Republic relevant compulsory provision, following the European Union legislative about management anduse of forest tree species reproductive material sources. Lesní dřeviny; smrk ztepilý; borovice lesní; modřín opadavý; zdroje reprodukčního materiálu; ověřování a testování; uznané porosty; semenné sady; kategorie testovaných (ověřených) zdrojů reprodukčního materiálu; tvorba syntetických populací pozitivně ově
Comprehesive methodical support of sustained grasslands maintenance for improvment ecological stability in agricultural landscape aimed at area with specific conditions. The experiment will be carried out on agricultural landscape, aimed at LFA and protected area, submontane regions etc. where are sustained grasslands utilized as units for landscape maintenance. Time, technological and economic demands of estabilishmentand maintenance of ÚSES (territorial system of ecological stability) units will be studied. After assessment of these experiments the methodical procedures will be formulated inclusive of:- evaluation of monitored areas from the point of view of naturalscience and ecological stability,- the option of optimal technological systems with exploitation generated database of working machines for maintaining of sustained grasslands and standard operation -revitalisation measures leading to landscape recovery -principles of managment ÚSES (territorial system of ecological stability) units Economic evaluation of tested methodical procedures and elaboration of basic normatives for ÚSES units management in agricultural landscape will be implemented at the p Ekologická stabilita; obhospodařovaní trvalých trávních porostů; zemědělská krajina; oblast se specifickými podmínkami; optimální technologické systémy; databáze pracovních strojů; normativy operací; ÚSES (územní systém ekologické stability); ekosystém	Comprehesive methodical support of sustained grasslands maintenance for improvment ecological stability in agricultural landscape aimed at area with specific conditions. The experiment will be carried out on agricultural landscape, aimed at LFA and protected area, submontane regions etc. where are sustained grasslands utilized as units for landscape maintenance. Time, technological and economic demands of estabilishmentand maintenance of ÚSES (territorial system of ecological stability) units will be studied. After assessment of these experiments the methodical procedures will be formulated inclusive of:- evaluation of monitored areas from the point of view of naturalscience and ecological stability,- the option of optimal technological systems with exploitation generated database of working machines for maintaining of sustained grasslands and standard operation -revitalisation measures leading to landscape recovery -principles of managment ÚSES (territorial system of ecological stability) units Economic evaluation of tested methodical procedures and elaboration of basic normatives for ÚSES units management in agricultural landscape will be implemented at the p Ekologická stabilita; obhospodařovaní trvalých trávních porostů; zemědělská krajina; oblast se specifickými podmínkami; optimální technologické systémy; databáze pracovních strojů; normativy operací; ÚSES (územní systém ekologické stability); ekosystém
Precipitation-runoff conditions of mountain forests and their possibilities in mitigating ex-treme situations - floods and drought Catastrophic floods in Bohemia and Moravia during the last 7 years induced a renewed inter-est in hydrological effectiveness of mountain forest ecosystems. Intensive precipitation in mountain generally wooded watersheds was the main cause of the floods.On the other hand, the importance of water-management functions is perceived both in general public and in pro-fessionals during long periods without precipitation, i.e. in periods of drought. Three long-term water-management research stations are available for the project research workers in the Orlické hory Mts. which can contribute to the study of these exceptionally serious all-society problems. In the oldest field research station (FRS) Deštné, all components are studied of the water budget of maintree species (Norway spruce and European beech) in mountain locations since 1976. The second FRS Česká Čermná serves for the study of slope runoff. Differences in runoff between clear felling, shelterwood felling and a mature Norway spruce stand are stu vodohospodářský význam lesů; vodní bilance smrku a buku; povrchový odtok na obnovních sečích; vodní režim zamokřeného povodí; možnosti tlumení povodní lesem; vodní režim lesa v bezsrážkových obdobích; optimalizace druhové skladby	Precipitation-runoff conditions of mountain forests and their possibilities in mitigating ex-treme situations - floods and drought Catastrophic floods in Bohemia and Moravia during the last 7 years induced a renewed inter-est in hydrological effectiveness of mountain forest ecosystems. Intensive precipitation in mountain generally wooded watersheds was the main cause of the floods.On the other hand, the importance of water-management functions is perceived both in general public and in pro-fessionals during long periods without precipitation, i.e. in periods of drought. Three long-term water-management research stations are available for the project research workers in the Orlické hory Mts. which can contribute to the study of these exceptionally serious all-society problems. In the oldest field research station (FRS) Deštné, all components are studied of the water budget of maintree species (Norway spruce and European beech) in mountain locations since 1976. The second FRS Česká Čermná serves for the study of slope runoff. Differences in runoff between clear felling, shelterwood felling and a mature Norway spruce stand are stu vodohospodářský význam lesů; vodní bilance smrku a buku; povrchový odtok na obnovních sečích; vodní režim zamokřeného povodí; možnosti tlumení povodní lesem; vodní režim lesa v bezsrážkových obdobích; optimalizace druhové skladby
Application of molecular biology methods for the effective use of genetic sources of LAB and the characterisation of functional foods quality. The aim of the project is the utilization of molecular biology methods for identification of lactic acid bacteria in real samples (probiotic products), estimation of the number of microorganisms in products, differentiation of viable and dead cells anddetermination of selected genes coding probiotic properties. probiotika; Lactobacillus; Bifidobacterium; molekulární diagnostika; real-time PCR; živé a mrtvé buňky; funkční potraviny	Application of molecular biology methods for the effective use of genetic sources of LAB and the characterisation of functional foods quality. The aim of the project is the utilization of molecular biology methods for identification of lactic acid bacteria in real samples (probiotic products), estimation of the number of microorganisms in products, differentiation of viable and dead cells anddetermination of selected genes coding probiotic properties. probiotika; Lactobacillus; Bifidobacterium; molekulární diagnostika; real-time PCR; živé a mrtvé buňky; funkční potraviny
Methodology of the design and construction of optimum variant of the partial floods and water erosion control system (FWECS) for hydrological extremes (floods and drought in landscape) elimination. The project solves methodology of the design and construction of the optimum variant of the partial floods and water erosion control system (FWESC) to eliminate hydrological extremes - floods and drought in landscape. The experimental area will be selected and individual variant of FWECS for testing will be defined. By the special catalogue of criteria (watermanagement, ecological, agro-technical, medicare, economic and the others) and by the process of MUT (Multiattribute Utility Theory) the optimumvariants of the partial system of FWECS will be evaluated. The basic necessary data will be formed by the stochastic simulation and downscaling of the rainfall process results and by the time series of the surface runoffs, which will be generated by hydrologic models (INFIL, KINFIL, WBCM, etc.). The results of this research project will be a verified methodology of the design and construction of optimum variant of FWECS for hydrological extremes (floods and drought in landscape) elimination and the e Hydrologické extrémy (povodně a sucha); varianty protipovodňových a protierozních opatření (PPPO); experimentální plocha; multikriteriální rozhodovací proces; simulace srážkových a odtokových procesů; hydrologické modely	Methodology of the design and construction of optimum variant of the partial floods and water erosion control system (FWECS) for hydrological extremes (floods and drought in landscape) elimination. The project solves methodology of the design and construction of the optimum variant of the partial floods and water erosion control system (FWESC) to eliminate hydrological extremes - floods and drought in landscape. The experimental area will be selected and individual variant of FWECS for testing will be defined. By the special catalogue of criteria (watermanagement, ecological, agro-technical, medicare, economic and the others) and by the process of MUT (Multiattribute Utility Theory) the optimumvariants of the partial system of FWECS will be evaluated. The basic necessary data will be formed by the stochastic simulation and downscaling of the rainfall process results and by the time series of the surface runoffs, which will be generated by hydrologic models (INFIL, KINFIL, WBCM, etc.). The results of this research project will be a verified methodology of the design and construction of optimum variant of FWECS for hydrological extremes (floods and drought in landscape) elimination and the e Hydrologické extrémy (povodně a sucha); varianty protipovodňových a protierozních opatření (PPPO); experimentální plocha; multikriteriální rozhodovací proces; simulace srážkových a odtokových procesů; hydrologické modely
Care for land under conditions with increased requirements for living environment protection Within farming on land in production regions has increased significance the harmonization of agricultural land intensive utilization with the need to maintain the non-production land functions and to protect it against secondary negative impacts of the intensive utilization. The objective of the suggested project solution are possibilities of land structure improvement within its intensive utilization, research of problems connected with the long-term utilization of different technologies for land cultivation, management of post-harvest remainders and intercrops utilization, reduction of risk connected with occurrence of herbicides residua in soil and drink water sources. The suggested solution comprises also risk reduction connected with the diseasestransfer from the post-harvest residua and inter-crops on the cultivated crops and increasing of the land protection against the water erosion in the production regions. Results of the project solution will be published in the reviewed scientific journal Hospodaření na půdě; péče o půdu; ochrana půdy; mimoprodukční funkce půdy	Care for land under conditions with increased requirements for living environment protection Within farming on land in production regions has increased significance the harmonization of agricultural land intensive utilization with the need to maintain the non-production land functions and to protect it against secondary negative impacts of the intensive utilization. The objective of the suggested project solution are possibilities of land structure improvement within its intensive utilization, research of problems connected with the long-term utilization of different technologies for land cultivation, management of post-harvest remainders and intercrops utilization, reduction of risk connected with occurrence of herbicides residua in soil and drink water sources. The suggested solution comprises also risk reduction connected with the diseasestransfer from the post-harvest residua and inter-crops on the cultivated crops and increasing of the land protection against the water erosion in the production regions. Results of the project solution will be published in the reviewed scientific journal Hospodaření na půdě; péče o půdu; ochrana půdy; mimoprodukční funkce půdy
Influence of enhanced ozone concentrations and meteorological factors on the stability of spruce and beech forest stands in the Czech Republic. The project is focused on documentation and quantification of ozone injury of spruce and beech stands in the Czech Republic. The design is based on 68 research plots with measured (passive samplers) and modelled ozone concentrations. At the same localities the biochemical (malondialdehyd) and physiological (epicuticular waxes) are analysed. The health stand of trees is documented by defoliation assessment; visual symptoms on trees and ground vegetation are also assessed. The analysed data are completedby meteorological measurements. The elevation and age effects on ozone injury are also evaluated. ozon; poškození lesních dřevin; modely imisní zátěže; vizuální symptomy poškození; MDA; epikutikulární vosky	Influence of enhanced ozone concentrations and meteorological factors on the stability of spruce and beech forest stands in the Czech Republic. The project is focused on documentation and quantification of ozone injury of spruce and beech stands in the Czech Republic. The design is based on 68 research plots with measured (passive samplers) and modelled ozone concentrations. At the same localities the biochemical (malondialdehyd) and physiological (epicuticular waxes) are analysed. The health stand of trees is documented by defoliation assessment; visual symptoms on trees and ground vegetation are also assessed. The analysed data are completedby meteorological measurements. The elevation and age effects on ozone injury are also evaluated. ozon; poškození lesních dřevin; modely imisní zátěže; vizuální symptomy poškození; MDA; epikutikulární vosky
Utilization of national sheep and goat genetic resources through their within-breed variability for production of engineered dairy products with different dietetic and organoleptic properties Project objective is to exploit genetic variability in national resources of sheep and goat breeds for diversification of their dairy production. Frequencies of alleles influencing milk composition and its dietetic and/or technological properties on theDNA level will be discovered, their expression in milk will be examined and possible functional characteristics of different genotypes designed for utilization in milk processing technology. genetické zdroje; ovce; kozy; genetická variabilita; mléčné bílkoviny; alternativní mléko	Utilization of national sheep and goat genetic resources through their within-breed variability for production of engineered dairy products with different dietetic and organoleptic properties Project objective is to exploit genetic variability in national resources of sheep and goat breeds for diversification of their dairy production. Frequencies of alleles influencing milk composition and its dietetic and/or technological properties on theDNA level will be discovered, their expression in milk will be examined and possible functional characteristics of different genotypes designed for utilization in milk processing technology. genetické zdroje; ovce; kozy; genetická variabilita; mléčné bílkoviny; alternativní mléko
Selections of cereals and potatoes cultivars and specification of growth suitable conditions for non-food starch production In the run of field experiments there will be realized a selection and testing of cereals and potatoes cultivars suitable for production of starch with non-food utilization. Qualitative and quantitative characteristics of starch will be evaluated for selected cultivars and basic features of starch suitable for biodegradated plastic production will be determinated. Database of electroforeograms will be constructed for definite identification of selected cultivars. nepotravinářská produkce; obsah škrobu; kvalita škrobu; odrůdy; ozimá pšenice; ozimý ječmen; jarní ječmen; brambory	Selections of cereals and potatoes cultivars and specification of growth suitable conditions for non-food starch production In the run of field experiments there will be realized a selection and testing of cereals and potatoes cultivars suitable for production of starch with non-food utilization. Qualitative and quantitative characteristics of starch will be evaluated for selected cultivars and basic features of starch suitable for biodegradated plastic production will be determinated. Database of electroforeograms will be constructed for definite identification of selected cultivars. nepotravinářská produkce; obsah škrobu; kvalita škrobu; odrůdy; ozimá pšenice; ozimý ječmen; jarní ječmen; brambory
Improvement of yield stability in winter barley by introducing resistance to important virus diseases and abiotic stresses The project to be solved in the 2005-2008 period was prepared to enable: 1/ detection of sources of resistance to important virus diseases; 2/ production of lines possessing combined resistance to BYDV and BaYMV using molacular markers; 3/ detection of relations between resistance to viruses and frost resistance; 4/ improvement of yield stability by introducing resistances to stresses. Developed lines with improved resistance to virus diseases and frost and drought tolerance will be exploited in practical breeding. Obtaing double resistance to BYDV and mosaic virus complex (BaYMV) will meet the requirements for registration (utilization) of developed cultivars in European countries. The planned research activities are based on long term cooperation ofspecialized research teams within RICP Prague-Ruzyně and participation of SELGEN company in the project. ozimý ječmen; šlechtění; žlutá zakrslost ječmene; mozaikový komplex; geny rezistence; molekulární markery; zimovzdornost; abiotické stresy; výnosová stabilita	Improvement of yield stability in winter barley by introducing resistance to important virus diseases and abiotic stresses The project to be solved in the 2005-2008 period was prepared to enable: 1/ detection of sources of resistance to important virus diseases; 2/ production of lines possessing combined resistance to BYDV and BaYMV using molacular markers; 3/ detection of relations between resistance to viruses and frost resistance; 4/ improvement of yield stability by introducing resistances to stresses. Developed lines with improved resistance to virus diseases and frost and drought tolerance will be exploited in practical breeding. Obtaing double resistance to BYDV and mosaic virus complex (BaYMV) will meet the requirements for registration (utilization) of developed cultivars in European countries. The planned research activities are based on long term cooperation ofspecialized research teams within RICP Prague-Ruzyně and participation of SELGEN company in the project. ozimý ječmen; šlechtění; žlutá zakrslost ječmene; mozaikový komplex; geny rezistence; molekulární markery; zimovzdornost; abiotické stresy; výnosová stabilita
The use of polymorphism of cereals genome repetitive regions for characterisation of gene resources and breeding materials The project is focused on investigation and application of the new generation of molecular DNA markers for the characterisation genetic resources and breeding materials of wheat and barley. The markers use polymorphic potential of the transposable element sequences and they are developed for scanning of genome regions abundant in genes mainly the regions with R-genes and with genes influencing product quality. Integration of SSAP and TAG systems are among the goals of the project. These systems will bedeveloped for evaluation of large files of analysed samples. DNA markery; genové zdroje; transposibilní elementy; DNA pole; ječmen; pšenice	The use of polymorphism of cereals genome repetitive regions for characterisation of gene resources and breeding materials The project is focused on investigation and application of the new generation of molecular DNA markers for the characterisation genetic resources and breeding materials of wheat and barley. The markers use polymorphic potential of the transposable element sequences and they are developed for scanning of genome regions abundant in genes mainly the regions with R-genes and with genes influencing product quality. Integration of SSAP and TAG systems are among the goals of the project. These systems will bedeveloped for evaluation of large files of analysed samples. DNA markery; genové zdroje; transposibilní elementy; DNA pole; ječmen; pšenice
Specification of properties and characteristics of common wheat grain and their linkages with feeding quality focused on monogasters feeding efficiency The proposed project will be aimed at properties and characteristics specification of common wheat feeding value for monogastric animals. In the experimental set of wide variable dihaploid lines and check varieties having already defined properties including presence or absence of 1B/1R translocation, there will be realised following chemical analyses: crude protein and extractive non-nitrogen substances contents with specification for starch content, non-starch polysaccharides, proportion of protein fractions and amino-acid content. Viscosity, grain hardiness and energetic value will be the further important traits of the tested wheat lines. Feeding value evaluation will be based on biological testing on the model animals (laboratory common rats) andselected monogasters (chicken broilers and pigs). The objective of the project will be focused on testing and selection of the wheat grain properties having close relation to feeding quality for poultry and pigs. On the base of these obtained results it Pšenice setá; chemické složení zrna; biologická testace; krmná hodnota; drůbež; prasata	Specification of properties and characteristics of common wheat grain and their linkages with feeding quality focused on monogasters feeding efficiency The proposed project will be aimed at properties and characteristics specification of common wheat feeding value for monogastric animals. In the experimental set of wide variable dihaploid lines and check varieties having already defined properties including presence or absence of 1B/1R translocation, there will be realised following chemical analyses: crude protein and extractive non-nitrogen substances contents with specification for starch content, non-starch polysaccharides, proportion of protein fractions and amino-acid content. Viscosity, grain hardiness and energetic value will be the further important traits of the tested wheat lines. Feeding value evaluation will be based on biological testing on the model animals (laboratory common rats) andselected monogasters (chicken broilers and pigs). The objective of the project will be focused on testing and selection of the wheat grain properties having close relation to feeding quality for poultry and pigs. On the base of these obtained results it Pšenice setá; chemické složení zrna; biologická testace; krmná hodnota; drůbež; prasata
Integrated Approach for Rain Water Utilization in Urban Area. The project deals with rain water utilization in urban area. During former intensive construction of sewer networks quick rain water outflow from urban area was preferred. Therefore nowadays most rain water is drained as quickly as possible to receivingbody without any useful use. The main disadvantages of such drainage conception are following: &#8594; overloading of the combine drainage system &#8594; increasing of the overflow volume from combined sewer overflow structure &#8594; dilution of thewastewater inflow to wastewater treatment plant during rain event &#8594; increasing of flow volume in receiving streams &#8594; reduction of groundwater restoration Rain water retention, use and infiltration belong among main possibilities of current situation improving. Following methods and approaches will be developed in the frame of the project: &#8594; rain water retention (definition of advantages, overview of suitable measures, assessment of the optimal parameters for storm water retentio retence dešťových vod; užívání dešťových vod; zasakování dešťových vod; kvalita dešťových vod	Integrated Approach for Rain Water Utilization in Urban Area. The project deals with rain water utilization in urban area. During former intensive construction of sewer networks quick rain water outflow from urban area was preferred. Therefore nowadays most rain water is drained as quickly as possible to receivingbody without any useful use. The main disadvantages of such drainage conception are following: &#8594; overloading of the combine drainage system &#8594; increasing of the overflow volume from combined sewer overflow structure &#8594; dilution of thewastewater inflow to wastewater treatment plant during rain event &#8594; increasing of flow volume in receiving streams &#8594; reduction of groundwater restoration Rain water retention, use and infiltration belong among main possibilities of current situation improving. Following methods and approaches will be developed in the frame of the project: &#8594; rain water retention (definition of advantages, overview of suitable measures, assessment of the optimal parameters for storm water retentio retence dešťových vod; užívání dešťových vod; zasakování dešťových vod; kvalita dešťových vod
Factors influencing the changes of forest soils in anthropogenically influenced conditions Submitted project aims to evaluate the effect of altitude and forest species composition on the acidification rate of forest soils in mountainous areas. Forest soil properties will be analysed and described along an altitude transect in the acidified area of the Jizerské Mountains. The differences in soil properties between different species composition of forests (natural beech forest, grown spruce forest, natural spruce forest in higher altitudes, etc.) will be assessed. The rate and depth of soil changes will be evaluated in the whole soil profiles. A mathematical model of acidificant transport through the soil profile will be applied. A special attention will be paid to forest humus floor forms and to detailed analysis of humus substances, also using infrared spectroscopy. The results obtained in the Jizerské Mountains will be compared to the results from a region with low anthropogenic impact. Selected areas will be described in details and used for a long-term monitoring of soil changes in futur lesní půdy; půdní charakteristiky; acidifikace; humus; lesní porost; nadmořská výška	Factors influencing the changes of forest soils in anthropogenically influenced conditions Submitted project aims to evaluate the effect of altitude and forest species composition on the acidification rate of forest soils in mountainous areas. Forest soil properties will be analysed and described along an altitude transect in the acidified area of the Jizerské Mountains. The differences in soil properties between different species composition of forests (natural beech forest, grown spruce forest, natural spruce forest in higher altitudes, etc.) will be assessed. The rate and depth of soil changes will be evaluated in the whole soil profiles. A mathematical model of acidificant transport through the soil profile will be applied. A special attention will be paid to forest humus floor forms and to detailed analysis of humus substances, also using infrared spectroscopy. The results obtained in the Jizerské Mountains will be compared to the results from a region with low anthropogenic impact. Selected areas will be described in details and used for a long-term monitoring of soil changes in futur lesní půdy; půdní charakteristiky; acidifikace; humus; lesní porost; nadmořská výška
The possibility of use clone mixture of Picea abies/L./Karst. with higher resistance to stresses on anthropogenic disturbed mountain localities The aim of project is to confirm suitability and affectivity of use potentially stress tolerant clone mixtures of Norway spruce for afforestation of extreme mountain sites and their impact to sustentation and possibly rise the stability of forest ecosystems. Health state and growth will be compared between Norway spruce clones from selected populations or individual trees from various mountain localities to common planting stock. Comparison will be taken on mountain clear-cuts and sites with difficultforest regeneration. Inter clone and inner clone variability in chosen clones will be evaluated in the scope of project. horské podmínky; smrk ztepilý; strestolerantní klonová směs; zalesňování; růst kultur	The possibility of use clone mixture of Picea abies/L./Karst. with higher resistance to stresses on anthropogenic disturbed mountain localities The aim of project is to confirm suitability and affectivity of use potentially stress tolerant clone mixtures of Norway spruce for afforestation of extreme mountain sites and their impact to sustentation and possibly rise the stability of forest ecosystems. Health state and growth will be compared between Norway spruce clones from selected populations or individual trees from various mountain localities to common planting stock. Comparison will be taken on mountain clear-cuts and sites with difficultforest regeneration. Inter clone and inner clone variability in chosen clones will be evaluated in the scope of project. horské podmínky; smrk ztepilý; strestolerantní klonová směs; zalesňování; růst kultur
Verification of new system of plant nitrogen nutrition CULTAN (Controlled Uptake Long Term Ammonium Nutrition) for chosen plants Crop management in sustainable agriculture strongly depends on the economical use of fertilizers. System CULTAN (Controlled Uptake Long Term Ammonium Nutrition) introduces a new alternative method of nitrogen application differed from traditional technologies. Special injection technique is developed for the soil application of nitrogen solution rench in ammonium ion into the depth of 7 -20 cm near cultivated plants. In this project CULTAN system will be compared to traditional method of splitted application of nitrogen during growing period of winter wheat, winter oil-seed rape, spring barley and maize. In the field experiments the effect of CULTAN system on additional growth of aboveground biomass and root growth, yield formation, content of macro- and microelements in plant biomass, quality of crop production, and content of mineral nitrogen in soil, attack of plants by fungi will be investigated during growing period. Crops will be cultivated in precise field experiments in different soil and clim CULTAN; hnojení; amonný dusík; pšenice ozimá; jarní ječmen; řepka ozimá; kukuřice	Verification of new system of plant nitrogen nutrition CULTAN (Controlled Uptake Long Term Ammonium Nutrition) for chosen plants Crop management in sustainable agriculture strongly depends on the economical use of fertilizers. System CULTAN (Controlled Uptake Long Term Ammonium Nutrition) introduces a new alternative method of nitrogen application differed from traditional technologies. Special injection technique is developed for the soil application of nitrogen solution rench in ammonium ion into the depth of 7 -20 cm near cultivated plants. In this project CULTAN system will be compared to traditional method of splitted application of nitrogen during growing period of winter wheat, winter oil-seed rape, spring barley and maize. In the field experiments the effect of CULTAN system on additional growth of aboveground biomass and root growth, yield formation, content of macro- and microelements in plant biomass, quality of crop production, and content of mineral nitrogen in soil, attack of plants by fungi will be investigated during growing period. Crops will be cultivated in precise field experiments in different soil and clim CULTAN; hnojení; amonný dusík; pšenice ozimá; jarní ječmen; řepka ozimá; kukuřice
Importance of close-to-nature silvicultural systems for the forest stability and production and non-production forest functions The proposed project has to compare the particular silvicultural systems from different points of view: production, economical, ecological as well as environmental. It aims the complex evaluation of the close-to-nature silviculture. The research will take place in concrete conditions of the Central Bohemia, in site conditions representing large areas. The actual growth and production parameters will be determined currently as well as retrospectively on the basis of height and diameter measurements, respectively tree annual rings analyses after tree boring. The research plots were and more will be established in forest parts managed by clear-cut, shelter and selective systems. The area selected represents relatively extent regions, it is located on following properties: Municipal Forest of Kutná Hora Town, School Training Forest Kostelec nad Černými lesy and Forests of The Czech Republic, Forest District Klokočná. For economical evaluation, the actual data from School Training Forest will be used: asso Přírodě blízké pěstování lesů; stabilita; biodiverzita; ekonomika; produkce; biocenózy; mimoprodukční funkce lesa	Importance of close-to-nature silvicultural systems for the forest stability and production and non-production forest functions The proposed project has to compare the particular silvicultural systems from different points of view: production, economical, ecological as well as environmental. It aims the complex evaluation of the close-to-nature silviculture. The research will take place in concrete conditions of the Central Bohemia, in site conditions representing large areas. The actual growth and production parameters will be determined currently as well as retrospectively on the basis of height and diameter measurements, respectively tree annual rings analyses after tree boring. The research plots were and more will be established in forest parts managed by clear-cut, shelter and selective systems. The area selected represents relatively extent regions, it is located on following properties: Municipal Forest of Kutná Hora Town, School Training Forest Kostelec nad Černými lesy and Forests of The Czech Republic, Forest District Klokočná. For economical evaluation, the actual data from School Training Forest will be used: asso Přírodě blízké pěstování lesů; stabilita; biodiverzita; ekonomika; produkce; biocenózy; mimoprodukční funkce lesa
Innovation of malting barley management practices by development of diagnostic methods for evaluation of canopy structure, health and nutrient state. The aim of the project is to develop innovated malting barley crop management practices in order to secure stable high and well-balanced malting quality, and to achieve high economic effectiveness of malting barley production. The mentioned crop management practices should enable to regain a leading position among world producers of malting barley. Fundamental elements of the innovated crop management practices will be modifications of crop rotations with forecrop-oriented practices, use of new technological elements, diagnostic and decision-making tools in plant nutrition, crop protection and canopy structure formation. jarní ječmen; sladovnická kvalita; technologie pěstování; ochrana rostlin; výživa rostlin; zakládání porostů; diagnostické metody	Innovation of malting barley management practices by development of diagnostic methods for evaluation of canopy structure, health and nutrient state. The aim of the project is to develop innovated malting barley crop management practices in order to secure stable high and well-balanced malting quality, and to achieve high economic effectiveness of malting barley production. The mentioned crop management practices should enable to regain a leading position among world producers of malting barley. Fundamental elements of the innovated crop management practices will be modifications of crop rotations with forecrop-oriented practices, use of new technological elements, diagnostic and decision-making tools in plant nutrition, crop protection and canopy structure formation. jarní ječmen; sladovnická kvalita; technologie pěstování; ochrana rostlin; výživa rostlin; zakládání porostů; diagnostické metody
Research of degradation of drinking water quality during accumulation process". The problems of eutrophicated reservoirs, the formation of biofilms in pipelines, the biological revival in storage tanks etc. are solved in many countries of Europe. For example in Belgium, France, Slovak Republic, Spain, Latvia, they are interested inthe needs for research of resources (emerging pathogens, study of point sources of microbial pollution, modelling of the treatment with the intervention of microorganisms, study of the distribution system and presence of microorganisms). Also study of biofilm formation and biological stability of drinking water is one of the major reasons for drinking water quality deterioration during water distribution. Biofilm, presented by thin film of slime-forming bacteria, micromycetes and microscopic protozoa, has considerable influence on hygienic quality, organoleptic and corrosive of drinking distributed water.Important problem, that should be solved, is construction and technical security of storage tanks. Limitation of influence of outside and inside key p Jakost pitné vody; akumulace a doprava vody; vodojemy; klimatizace	Research of degradation of drinking water quality during accumulation process". The problems of eutrophicated reservoirs, the formation of biofilms in pipelines, the biological revival in storage tanks etc. are solved in many countries of Europe. For example in Belgium, France, Slovak Republic, Spain, Latvia, they are interested inthe needs for research of resources (emerging pathogens, study of point sources of microbial pollution, modelling of the treatment with the intervention of microorganisms, study of the distribution system and presence of microorganisms). Also study of biofilm formation and biological stability of drinking water is one of the major reasons for drinking water quality deterioration during water distribution. Biofilm, presented by thin film of slime-forming bacteria, micromycetes and microscopic protozoa, has considerable influence on hygienic quality, organoleptic and corrosive of drinking distributed water.Important problem, that should be solved, is construction and technical security of storage tanks. Limitation of influence of outside and inside key p Jakost pitné vody; akumulace a doprava vody; vodojemy; klimatizace
Research of separated cattle slurry utilisation as plastic organic litter in stables for cattle at biotechnological optimisation of welfare conditions. Improvement of agriculture negative impact, mainly livestock production on living environment and breeded animals welfare improvement are the main objective of the project. Utilization of the controlled microbial process to obtain thermally adopted separate of the cattle slurry useable as plastic litter improves climate significantly in the dairy cows stables, welfare, reduction of costs for breeding. The project anticipates possible solution under respecting of economical costs minimization. Dojnice; stelivo; kejda; amoniak; skleníkové plyny; patogeny; mikrobiologie	Research of separated cattle slurry utilisation as plastic organic litter in stables for cattle at biotechnological optimisation of welfare conditions. Improvement of agriculture negative impact, mainly livestock production on living environment and breeded animals welfare improvement are the main objective of the project. Utilization of the controlled microbial process to obtain thermally adopted separate of the cattle slurry useable as plastic litter improves climate significantly in the dairy cows stables, welfare, reduction of costs for breeding. The project anticipates possible solution under respecting of economical costs minimization. Dojnice; stelivo; kejda; amoniak; skleníkové plyny; patogeny; mikrobiologie
Cultivation of grass covers and landscape management under specific conditions of sloped, particularly protected landscape territories and mountain regions LFA. The project is dealing with research of technological systems for grass covers cultivation landscape management under specific conditions of sloped territories particularly protected and mountain LFA regions. The objective of the project is to reduce costs for high quality feedstuffs production from perennial grass covers, costs for non-production utilization of grass covers and for landscape management. Other goals of the projects is reduction of unfavourable effect of activities regarding the projectsolution on agricultural land and living environment, to contribute to the natural vegetation and landscape conservation as well as to specify conditions for safety operations of mechanization on slopes. The results of solution should strenghten competitive power of agricultural subjects with farm activity on the sloped regions. technologické systémy v zemědělství; chráněné krajinné oblasti; pícninářská oblast; horské oblasti LFA	Cultivation of grass covers and landscape management under specific conditions of sloped, particularly protected landscape territories and mountain regions LFA. The project is dealing with research of technological systems for grass covers cultivation landscape management under specific conditions of sloped territories particularly protected and mountain LFA regions. The objective of the project is to reduce costs for high quality feedstuffs production from perennial grass covers, costs for non-production utilization of grass covers and for landscape management. Other goals of the projects is reduction of unfavourable effect of activities regarding the projectsolution on agricultural land and living environment, to contribute to the natural vegetation and landscape conservation as well as to specify conditions for safety operations of mechanization on slopes. The results of solution should strenghten competitive power of agricultural subjects with farm activity on the sloped regions. technologické systémy v zemědělství; chráněné krajinné oblasti; pícninářská oblast; horské oblasti LFA
Raising of quality and efficiency of milk and milk products manufacture in ecological farming. The project consists in complex solution of bio milk production in ecological farming as a whole. It starts with cow milk nutrition (fodder production, storing, preparation and composition), technology of cattle breeding, milk production and its storage,providing of milk quality and safety and finishes with the milk processing in small and big enterprises and the evaluation of proposed systems GAP, GMP, GHP and HACCP. These systems will available under conditions of biomilk production and its processingon biomilk products. výživa; bezpečnost; bio; ekologie; zemědělství; krmivo; mléko; technologie; mykotoxiny	Raising of quality and efficiency of milk and milk products manufacture in ecological farming. The project consists in complex solution of bio milk production in ecological farming as a whole. It starts with cow milk nutrition (fodder production, storing, preparation and composition), technology of cattle breeding, milk production and its storage,providing of milk quality and safety and finishes with the milk processing in small and big enterprises and the evaluation of proposed systems GAP, GMP, GHP and HACCP. These systems will available under conditions of biomilk production and its processingon biomilk products. výživa; bezpečnost; bio; ekologie; zemědělství; krmivo; mléko; technologie; mykotoxiny
Integrated production of sweet and sour cherries. The aim of this project is a continuation of the research on chosen problems of sweet cherry growing in the Czech Republic that were studied in a framework of previous projects QD 1047 and QD 1048. A guideline of sweet cherry growing will be completed byfour-year study of experimental orchards in fruiting stage. A focus will be put on improving fruit quality and yields in orchards on dwarf rootstocks utilising chosen techniques of growing and orchard management. Summing of temperature degrees will beused for precising time of chemical treatments against cherry fly and susceptibility of new sweet cherry cultivars to monilia rod will be detected. The new fungicides against main diseases will be tested. The phytosanitary measures reducing negative influence of the PDV, PNRSV and ACLSV viruses in cherry plantings will be proposed. The next topic will be a development of new methods of long-time sweet cherry storage. Another research objective will be evaluation of chosen genotypes (advanced selections) třešně; višně; slabě rostoucí podnože; odrůdy; výnos; kvalita plodů; obdělávání půdy; nadkrytí výsadby; poškození květů mrazem; choroby; virózy; vrtule třešňová; skladování	Integrated production of sweet and sour cherries. The aim of this project is a continuation of the research on chosen problems of sweet cherry growing in the Czech Republic that were studied in a framework of previous projects QD 1047 and QD 1048. A guideline of sweet cherry growing will be completed byfour-year study of experimental orchards in fruiting stage. A focus will be put on improving fruit quality and yields in orchards on dwarf rootstocks utilising chosen techniques of growing and orchard management. Summing of temperature degrees will beused for precising time of chemical treatments against cherry fly and susceptibility of new sweet cherry cultivars to monilia rod will be detected. The new fungicides against main diseases will be tested. The phytosanitary measures reducing negative influence of the PDV, PNRSV and ACLSV viruses in cherry plantings will be proposed. The next topic will be a development of new methods of long-time sweet cherry storage. Another research objective will be evaluation of chosen genotypes (advanced selections) třešně; višně; slabě rostoucí podnože; odrůdy; výnos; kvalita plodů; obdělávání půdy; nadkrytí výsadby; poškození květů mrazem; choroby; virózy; vrtule třešňová; skladování
The research and pilot validation of genomic methods applicable to the selection of quality and commercial utilisation of farm animals and their products. The genomics and its methods become the integral part of effective breeding and utilisation of the animal production on the market. The greatest restriction of their wider implementation is high-cost of DNA analyses. Analogically to foreign projects ofapplied research, the purpose of our project is to develop the low-cost methods for the genetic markers detection applicable to the more effective selection of quality production and animal identification. Our project contributes to the solution of foodsafety in the Czech Republic by the development of methods for traceability of animal sources in food. Genetické markery; metody detekce; kvalita produkce; dohledatelnost; skot; prase	The research and pilot validation of genomic methods applicable to the selection of quality and commercial utilisation of farm animals and their products. The genomics and its methods become the integral part of effective breeding and utilisation of the animal production on the market. The greatest restriction of their wider implementation is high-cost of DNA analyses. Analogically to foreign projects ofapplied research, the purpose of our project is to develop the low-cost methods for the genetic markers detection applicable to the more effective selection of quality production and animal identification. Our project contributes to the solution of foodsafety in the Czech Republic by the development of methods for traceability of animal sources in food. Genetické markery; metody detekce; kvalita produkce; dohledatelnost; skot; prase
Starch and protein characteristics in wheat for industrial utilization; donors of valuable characters, recommendation of cultivars and appropriate growing technologies. Released winter wheat cultivars and some selected lines will be evaluated in three types of field trials- field test for recommendation of cultivars, experiments with cultivars and lines aimed at assessment of fodder quality as well as field tests of selected cultivars under different tillage and input levels. Also suitable genetic resources will be evaluated in field trials and donors of valuable characters will be selected and described. Beside field evaluation, starch and protein content and structure in seed will be analyzed in laboratory tests. Valuable materials- donors of quality characters , will be characterized by means of protein markers and DNA markers; convenient markers for utilization in breeding will be searched. The project objective is to characterize starch and protein contents and structure in released wheat cultivars and selected donors, with respect to different industrial utilization of grain (starch bio-ethanol, bio-degradable matters, fodder). Also donors of import pšenice; odrůdy; prostředí; agrotechnika; kvalita zrna; škrob; bílkoviny; nepotravinářské využití	Starch and protein characteristics in wheat for industrial utilization; donors of valuable characters, recommendation of cultivars and appropriate growing technologies. Released winter wheat cultivars and some selected lines will be evaluated in three types of field trials- field test for recommendation of cultivars, experiments with cultivars and lines aimed at assessment of fodder quality as well as field tests of selected cultivars under different tillage and input levels. Also suitable genetic resources will be evaluated in field trials and donors of valuable characters will be selected and described. Beside field evaluation, starch and protein content and structure in seed will be analyzed in laboratory tests. Valuable materials- donors of quality characters , will be characterized by means of protein markers and DNA markers; convenient markers for utilization in breeding will be searched. The project objective is to characterize starch and protein contents and structure in released wheat cultivars and selected donors, with respect to different industrial utilization of grain (starch bio-ethanol, bio-degradable matters, fodder). Also donors of import pšenice; odrůdy; prostředí; agrotechnika; kvalita zrna; škrob; bílkoviny; nepotravinářské využití
Innovation of pest control strategies in pome fruit against insect pests in IPM system and organic farming The aim of the project is to innovate the pest control strategies in pome fruit for integrated pest management (IPM) and organic farming, increase the quality of products, reduce the level of pesticide residues in products and standardize the analyticalmethods of detection of pesticide residues in fruit. The biological efficacy of selected pesticides, including new types of insecticides, microbial and botanical insecticides on pests of apples and pears will be evaluated. The side effects of insecticideson natural enemies will be evaluated. The methods of monitoring of insecticide effect on biodiversity of arthropods will be developed and verified. New pest management strategies in apples and pears will be proposed to minimize the incidence of residuesof pesticides in fruit and increase the effectiveness of pest control and decrease the negative effect of residues of pesticides on the environment. For the organic production of apples and pears, the knowledge about the efficacy of biological and no c Ochrana jádrovin; rezidua pesticidů; rezidua přírodních kontaminantů; jabloně; hrušně; metody detekce; integrovaná produkce; organické zemědělství	Innovation of pest control strategies in pome fruit against insect pests in IPM system and organic farming The aim of the project is to innovate the pest control strategies in pome fruit for integrated pest management (IPM) and organic farming, increase the quality of products, reduce the level of pesticide residues in products and standardize the analyticalmethods of detection of pesticide residues in fruit. The biological efficacy of selected pesticides, including new types of insecticides, microbial and botanical insecticides on pests of apples and pears will be evaluated. The side effects of insecticideson natural enemies will be evaluated. The methods of monitoring of insecticide effect on biodiversity of arthropods will be developed and verified. New pest management strategies in apples and pears will be proposed to minimize the incidence of residuesof pesticides in fruit and increase the effectiveness of pest control and decrease the negative effect of residues of pesticides on the environment. For the organic production of apples and pears, the knowledge about the efficacy of biological and no c Ochrana jádrovin; rezidua pesticidů; rezidua přírodních kontaminantů; jabloně; hrušně; metody detekce; integrovaná produkce; organické zemědělství
Sources of resistance and resistance selection methods for complex resistance breeding to main leaf diseases of wheat. The objective of the project proposal is to meet ecological and economic demands; protection of environment from pesticide residues for production of healthy food and reduction of wheat production costs (low - input). Wheat breeding for disease resistance contributes to the above mentioned goals. In the project yield losses caused by different pathogens as well as other proposed projects covering similar topics, leaf diseases of wheat: rusts, powdery mildew, septoria leaf, blotch and tan spot are considered. Virulence in the pathogen populations will be studied particularly on selected registered wheat cultivars and sources of resistance. In the course of the described activities methods for resistance determination will be tested and innovated for theapplication in the breeding for resistance to a complex of pathogens. Obtained sources of resistance will be combined and, if needed, resistance genes will be transferred from primitive to agronomically suitable genotypes. The aim of the experimental w Pšenice; oves; rezistence; rzi; padlí travní; braničnatka pšeničná; listová skvrnitost pšenice; patotypy; geny rezistence; šlechtění; testy rezistence	Sources of resistance and resistance selection methods for complex resistance breeding to main leaf diseases of wheat. The objective of the project proposal is to meet ecological and economic demands; protection of environment from pesticide residues for production of healthy food and reduction of wheat production costs (low - input). Wheat breeding for disease resistance contributes to the above mentioned goals. In the project yield losses caused by different pathogens as well as other proposed projects covering similar topics, leaf diseases of wheat: rusts, powdery mildew, septoria leaf, blotch and tan spot are considered. Virulence in the pathogen populations will be studied particularly on selected registered wheat cultivars and sources of resistance. In the course of the described activities methods for resistance determination will be tested and innovated for theapplication in the breeding for resistance to a complex of pathogens. Obtained sources of resistance will be combined and, if needed, resistance genes will be transferred from primitive to agronomically suitable genotypes. The aim of the experimental w Pšenice; oves; rezistence; rzi; padlí travní; braničnatka pšeničná; listová skvrnitost pšenice; patotypy; geny rezistence; šlechtění; testy rezistence
Selection of garlic (Allium sativum L.)clones comprising a high level of biologicaly active compound prekursors: corresponding gene cloning and characterisation To develop an effective tool for garlic (Allium sativum L.) characterisation and selection of clones containing a high amount of biologically active compounds is the aim of the project. Methods and approaches of molecular biology will be explored. Protocols used in structural and functional genomic will be used to detect sequence variability and to detect the effect of environmental factors. DNA array will be developed, which make possible investigation of gene expression. Possibility to use similar approaches and tools for evaluation of other species within the Allium genus will be verified. Based on the results similar project dealing with medicinal plants can be drawn. Along with condition for hunting of biologically active compounds producers. česnek; klon; genové zdroje; molekulární biologie; DNA arrays; sirné látky; prekursory biologicky aktivních látek	Selection of garlic (Allium sativum L.)clones comprising a high level of biologicaly active compound prekursors: corresponding gene cloning and characterisation To develop an effective tool for garlic (Allium sativum L.) characterisation and selection of clones containing a high amount of biologically active compounds is the aim of the project. Methods and approaches of molecular biology will be explored. Protocols used in structural and functional genomic will be used to detect sequence variability and to detect the effect of environmental factors. DNA array will be developed, which make possible investigation of gene expression. Possibility to use similar approaches and tools for evaluation of other species within the Allium genus will be verified. Based on the results similar project dealing with medicinal plants can be drawn. Along with condition for hunting of biologically active compounds producers. česnek; klon; genové zdroje; molekulární biologie; DNA arrays; sirné látky; prekursory biologicky aktivních látek
Predictive soil agro-hydrological models of the retention of soil in the CR and their integration into the EU databases The main objective of the present proposal is to integrate soil hydraulic properties already available at the different national institutions in the CR into a central database and to use these data to develope and derive predictive soil hydrological models better known as pedotransfer functions. These pedotransfer functions anable an efficient and rather accurate prediction of the hydraulic properties required in every model that deals with water and solute transport in the unsaturated zone. To addressthe project objective, three sub-objectives have been distinguished in the project: 1. Development of relational database of soil hydraulic properties contributing by the participating national institutions. 2. Analyse the collected data in the form of new pedotransfer functions applicable at the European scale. 3. Demonstrate the quality of the developped pedotransfer functions by applying them in a practice (erosion studies, soil - water transport processes). 4. Add the data of the Cze pedotransferové funkce; půdní hydraulické vlastnosti; databáze; transportní simulační modely	Predictive soil agro-hydrological models of the retention of soil in the CR and their integration into the EU databases The main objective of the present proposal is to integrate soil hydraulic properties already available at the different national institutions in the CR into a central database and to use these data to develope and derive predictive soil hydrological models better known as pedotransfer functions. These pedotransfer functions anable an efficient and rather accurate prediction of the hydraulic properties required in every model that deals with water and solute transport in the unsaturated zone. To addressthe project objective, three sub-objectives have been distinguished in the project: 1. Development of relational database of soil hydraulic properties contributing by the participating national institutions. 2. Analyse the collected data in the form of new pedotransfer functions applicable at the European scale. 3. Demonstrate the quality of the developped pedotransfer functions by applying them in a practice (erosion studies, soil - water transport processes). 4. Add the data of the Cze pedotransferové funkce; půdní hydraulické vlastnosti; databáze; transportní simulační modely
Molecular-genetic methods for identification of probiotic bacteria with good technologic, hygienic, and health properties Growth media for the lactic acid bacteria and bifidobacteria with new composition will be composed. New approaches of the isolation and separation of DNA and identification of industrialy important bacteria will be introduced. New strains of lactobacilliand bifidobacteria of human origin with good technologic properties will be isolated and identified. Right identification of part Czech gene resources of lactic acid bacteria in collection Laktoflora will be confirmed. Kultivační média; molekulárně genetické metody; funkční potraviny; bifidobakterie; bakterie mléčného kvašení; identifikace; charakterizace probiotických kmenů	Molecular-genetic methods for identification of probiotic bacteria with good technologic, hygienic, and health properties Growth media for the lactic acid bacteria and bifidobacteria with new composition will be composed. New approaches of the isolation and separation of DNA and identification of industrialy important bacteria will be introduced. New strains of lactobacilliand bifidobacteria of human origin with good technologic properties will be isolated and identified. Right identification of part Czech gene resources of lactic acid bacteria in collection Laktoflora will be confirmed. Kultivační média; molekulárně genetické metody; funkční potraviny; bifidobakterie; bakterie mléčného kvašení; identifikace; charakterizace probiotických kmenů
Application of diffractive optical elements in society and industry. Creating, developing and transfer technologie and R&D tools of difractive optical elements to the levels of various industry and society applications, leading to production of new and/or innovative products with higher ability of competition on both domestic and world markets. Specifically, these will be primarily elements for optical document security and counterfeiting, optical elements for car headlights, and high-power focusators for industrial lasers. diffractive optical element; waveguide diffractive structure; optical laser writer; optical document security	Application of diffractive optical elements in society and industry. Creating, developing and transfer technologie and R&D tools of difractive optical elements to the levels of various industry and society applications, leading to production of new and/or innovative products with higher ability of competition on both domestic and world markets. Specifically, these will be primarily elements for optical document security and counterfeiting, optical elements for car headlights, and high-power focusators for industrial lasers. diffractive optical element; waveguide diffractive structure; optical laser writer; optical document security
*New line of universal tool - room milling machines INTOS. *New line of universal tool - room milling machines INTOS remarkably increase utility value and regarding to technical parametres shift new line over our competitors parametres. tool - room milling machine; workmanship CNC; NC control system; rectangular control; HSC machining	*New line of universal tool - room milling machines INTOS. *New line of universal tool - room milling machines INTOS remarkably increase utility value and regarding to technical parametres shift new line over our competitors parametres. tool - room milling machine; workmanship CNC; NC control system; rectangular control; HSC machining
Materials and technology development of fusion reactors componenets. The project is focused on development of necessary expert and technical infrastructure for an active participation of the Czech research organisations into the EU R&D programmes on controlled thermonuclear fusion, and on obtaining of a practical experience and knowledge database for a maximum involvement of the Czech research and industrial organizations in supply of various fusion power reactor components (e.g. for ITER - International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor). thermonuclear fusion; iter; structure materials; corrosion resistivity	Materials and technology development of fusion reactors componenets. The project is focused on development of necessary expert and technical infrastructure for an active participation of the Czech research organisations into the EU R&D programmes on controlled thermonuclear fusion, and on obtaining of a practical experience and knowledge database for a maximum involvement of the Czech research and industrial organizations in supply of various fusion power reactor components (e.g. for ITER - International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor). thermonuclear fusion; iter; structure materials; corrosion resistivity
Research and development of boilers for environmentaly friendly burning fo carbon natural gas. This main goal of the project is development of heating boiler for using carbon gas from coalmine in Northmoravian region. These single units will be constructed up to 30 kW heating output. Boilers will be equipped by atmosferic burner or premix burner. boiler; carbon natural gas; atmospheric burner; premix burner	Research and development of boilers for environmentaly friendly burning fo carbon natural gas. This main goal of the project is development of heating boiler for using carbon gas from coalmine in Northmoravian region. These single units will be constructed up to 30 kW heating output. Boilers will be equipped by atmosferic burner or premix burner. boiler; carbon natural gas; atmospheric burner; premix burner
*Research and development of sophistry moleculspreparation. *Research and development of FC production and pilot plant verification of the developed process will be put through. The project will be mainly comcetraced on a development of a technology of the sophistic molecules with high added value including elaboration of details for production and its installation. fine chemicals; pharmaceutics; aromatics; condiments; analytical chemistry; photochemistry; chiral compounds	*Research and development of sophistry moleculspreparation. *Research and development of FC production and pilot plant verification of the developed process will be put through. The project will be mainly comcetraced on a development of a technology of the sophistic molecules with high added value including elaboration of details for production and its installation. fine chemicals; pharmaceutics; aromatics; condiments; analytical chemistry; photochemistry; chiral compounds
Optimization of the choice of metallic biomaterials wih respect to their composition properties, service life and side effects. The project proposed is interdisciplinary by nature: it has a materials-and-technology componenet, investigating the existing range of steels and alloys to improve the quality of the material and support a competitive production, and a materials-in-medicine componenet, focusing on clinical and preclinical testing of the materials with a view to reducing the side effects of the implants, extending the use life of the implants and incresasing the success rate of the interventions. humane medicine; biomaterials; bioenvironment; biocompactibility; dental and surgery implants; surgery instruments	Optimization of the choice of metallic biomaterials wih respect to their composition properties, service life and side effects. The project proposed is interdisciplinary by nature: it has a materials-and-technology componenet, investigating the existing range of steels and alloys to improve the quality of the material and support a competitive production, and a materials-in-medicine componenet, focusing on clinical and preclinical testing of the materials with a view to reducing the side effects of the implants, extending the use life of the implants and incresasing the success rate of the interventions. humane medicine; biomaterials; bioenvironment; biocompactibility; dental and surgery implants; surgery instruments
The project of the optimalization of the technical and economical characteristics of the structural constructions lifetime. The main aim of the project is to create the set of generally usable and available tools for the optimization of the building construction for the subjects entering the project of the building construction including the proposal, the realization, runningand the downfall of the project. The system will primarily get out of the users requirement for the information in the ohase of the proposal and the running of the building construction to make possible to create "the curriculum vitae of the building construction from the technical nd the economical aspects. lifetime; building construction	The project of the optimalization of the technical and economical characteristics of the structural constructions lifetime. The main aim of the project is to create the set of generally usable and available tools for the optimization of the building construction for the subjects entering the project of the building construction including the proposal, the realization, runningand the downfall of the project. The system will primarily get out of the users requirement for the information in the ohase of the proposal and the running of the building construction to make possible to create "the curriculum vitae of the building construction from the technical nd the economical aspects. lifetime; building construction
*New technical polymers for crosslinkable composites. *Development of new polymers based on hybrids. Hybrids applications in production of high thermal resistant and toughness composites; structural bonding of different materials will be performed. The special epoxy resin, urethane modified epoxy resins andurethane modified unsaturated polyester will be developed to achieve special unstanding properties. Development and application of low styrene emission or styrene free high solid unsaturated polyester. technical polymers; composites; adhesives; special epoxy systems; polyester urethane hybrid	*New technical polymers for crosslinkable composites. *Development of new polymers based on hybrids. Hybrids applications in production of high thermal resistant and toughness composites; structural bonding of different materials will be performed. The special epoxy resin, urethane modified epoxy resins andurethane modified unsaturated polyester will be developed to achieve special unstanding properties. Development and application of low styrene emission or styrene free high solid unsaturated polyester. technical polymers; composites; adhesives; special epoxy systems; polyester urethane hybrid
Reactor physics experiments for advanced and new reactor types. The project is proposed to complete database of experimental results from LR-0 reactor, which part will be added to existing database at OECD/NEA as the Czech Republic contribution. The project will allow RD for the development of experimental methods for nuclear fuel burn-up determination, for the study of the influence of new construction material, as well as new nuclear fuel features on core neutron-physical parameters (e.g. HTR, HFR). nuclear safety; nuclear energy; reactor physics; experiments; burn-up; decommissioning; experimental database	Reactor physics experiments for advanced and new reactor types. The project is proposed to complete database of experimental results from LR-0 reactor, which part will be added to existing database at OECD/NEA as the Czech Republic contribution. The project will allow RD for the development of experimental methods for nuclear fuel burn-up determination, for the study of the influence of new construction material, as well as new nuclear fuel features on core neutron-physical parameters (e.g. HTR, HFR). nuclear safety; nuclear energy; reactor physics; experiments; burn-up; decommissioning; experimental database
Methods and tools for evaluation and increase of reliability of human factor in the operational of nuclear instalation. Design and validation of the methodology for reliability evaluation of the human factor in the operation of nuclear power plants. Then, base on the methodology, the effort will be oriented to the design and testing of tools for continuous improvement andincreasing of the human factor reliability, i.e. decreasing the possibility of its failure. Outputs of the projects are the methodology and procedure of the human factor reliability assessment system including sophisticated software support. reliability; human factor; operational of nuclear instalation	Methods and tools for evaluation and increase of reliability of human factor in the operational of nuclear instalation. Design and validation of the methodology for reliability evaluation of the human factor in the operation of nuclear power plants. Then, base on the methodology, the effort will be oriented to the design and testing of tools for continuous improvement andincreasing of the human factor reliability, i.e. decreasing the possibility of its failure. Outputs of the projects are the methodology and procedure of the human factor reliability assessment system including sophisticated software support. reliability; human factor; operational of nuclear instalation
*Advanced control and optimization for power generation. *Development and implementation of software components for advanced control and optimization in power generation and heat production and their validation in pilot applications. The outputs will be components for: optimal unit allocation for achieving maximum efficiency in combined heat and power production, advanced methods of control and optimization of combustion efficiency and reduction of SO2, CO2 and Nox emissions for boilers with multistage air distribution and for boilers with fluidized bed combustion (considering the limestone consumption). combustion efficiency; emissions; economic allocation; predictive control; optimization	*Advanced control and optimization for power generation. *Development and implementation of software components for advanced control and optimization in power generation and heat production and their validation in pilot applications. The outputs will be components for: optimal unit allocation for achieving maximum efficiency in combined heat and power production, advanced methods of control and optimization of combustion efficiency and reduction of SO2, CO2 and Nox emissions for boilers with multistage air distribution and for boilers with fluidized bed combustion (considering the limestone consumption). combustion efficiency; emissions; economic allocation; predictive control; optimization
Microtechnology and nanotechnology in chemical, process and biological engineering: Methods of study of micro- and nano-structured materials and design of microchemical devices. Theoretical and experimental analysis of chemical and biological processes and their combinations which can be performed in a more effective way in microdimensions that in macrodimensions. Functional samples of universal microdevices based on a photosensitive glass and specific microdevices (electrolytic diode and transistor, reaction separation and electroseparation unit for analysis) will be designed, produced and experimentally tested. microtechnology; nanotechnology; microlithography; microreactors; microfluidics	Microtechnology and nanotechnology in chemical, process and biological engineering: Methods of study of micro- and nano-structured materials and design of microchemical devices. Theoretical and experimental analysis of chemical and biological processes and their combinations which can be performed in a more effective way in microdimensions that in macrodimensions. Functional samples of universal microdevices based on a photosensitive glass and specific microdevices (electrolytic diode and transistor, reaction separation and electroseparation unit for analysis) will be designed, produced and experimentally tested. microtechnology; nanotechnology; microlithography; microreactors; microfluidics
Research of bariers for repositories of radioactive wastes. The project is focused primarily on specification of input parameters for safety assessments of Czech repositories of radioactive waste, mastering and implementation of advanced computer codes for performance assessment of barriers of repositories, and study of processes and events occurring in repositories and important for safety of repositories. radioactive wastes; management; disposal; modelling; safety	Research of bariers for repositories of radioactive wastes. The project is focused primarily on specification of input parameters for safety assessments of Czech repositories of radioactive waste, mastering and implementation of advanced computer codes for performance assessment of barriers of repositories, and study of processes and events occurring in repositories and important for safety of repositories. radioactive wastes; management; disposal; modelling; safety
Optimization of structural reliability and calibration of EU standards. The project is focused on the development of methods for optimization of structural reliability and durability of construction works, based on the effective calibration of new European standards taking into account conditions of the Czech Republic. Verified partial factors for actions and material properties, combination factors and others safety elements will be recommended and included to the National annexes of new European standards EU. optimization of reliability; service working life of construction works; national reliability indices	Optimization of structural reliability and calibration of EU standards. The project is focused on the development of methods for optimization of structural reliability and durability of construction works, based on the effective calibration of new European standards taking into account conditions of the Czech Republic. Verified partial factors for actions and material properties, combination factors and others safety elements will be recommended and included to the National annexes of new European standards EU. optimization of reliability; service working life of construction works; national reliability indices
Methods and tools for evaluation of effect of engineered barriers on the distant interactions in environment of deep repository facility. Methods and tools for evaluation of effect of engineered barriers on the distant interactions in environment of deep repository facility. engineered barriers; distant interactions; deep repository facility	Methods and tools for evaluation of effect of engineered barriers on the distant interactions in environment of deep repository facility. Methods and tools for evaluation of effect of engineered barriers on the distant interactions in environment of deep repository facility. engineered barriers; distant interactions; deep repository facility
New methods for plastic pipes evaluation. New methods for plastic pipes evaluation. The application of new or modified methods of fracture mechanics and structural methods. Data enable to formulate key material criteria for prediction of materials life time (HDPE - gas industry, PP, PEX - distribution of hot water and combination of these materials for production of pressure pipes). plastic pipes; HDPE; PP; PEX; fracture mechanics; structural methods	New methods for plastic pipes evaluation. New methods for plastic pipes evaluation. The application of new or modified methods of fracture mechanics and structural methods. Data enable to formulate key material criteria for prediction of materials life time (HDPE - gas industry, PP, PEX - distribution of hot water and combination of these materials for production of pressure pipes). plastic pipes; HDPE; PP; PEX; fracture mechanics; structural methods
Development of self-reinforced parts made from oriented polypropylene tapes of fibrs. Development of polypropylene self-reinforced parts consists from two steps. The first one deals with the study of changes of stuctural and mechanical properties of oriented polypriopylene tapes or fibres due to the healting to the melting temperature range. The second step deals with the development of such polymer blends and technologies that could be used to the production of relavitely large plate products constructed from these tapes (fibrs) and compacted by pressing. polypropylene; polyolefin blends; orientation of polymers; kinetic of fusion	Development of self-reinforced parts made from oriented polypropylene tapes of fibrs. Development of polypropylene self-reinforced parts consists from two steps. The first one deals with the study of changes of stuctural and mechanical properties of oriented polypriopylene tapes or fibres due to the healting to the melting temperature range. The second step deals with the development of such polymer blends and technologies that could be used to the production of relavitely large plate products constructed from these tapes (fibrs) and compacted by pressing. polypropylene; polyolefin blends; orientation of polymers; kinetic of fusion
Development of high melt strenght polypropylene for foams in the reactor. Project is focused on the way of high melt strenght polypropylene (HMS-PP) preparation and production. Typical properties of PP homopolymers and impact and random copolymers should be maintained. The reason of research and development is the usage of PPfor such applications as foaming, extrusion coating, melt-stage thermoforming, which are not available with standard PP. polypropylen; melt strenght; foaming; HMS-PP; process of production	Development of high melt strenght polypropylene for foams in the reactor. Project is focused on the way of high melt strenght polypropylene (HMS-PP) preparation and production. Typical properties of PP homopolymers and impact and random copolymers should be maintained. The reason of research and development is the usage of PPfor such applications as foaming, extrusion coating, melt-stage thermoforming, which are not available with standard PP. polypropylen; melt strenght; foaming; HMS-PP; process of production
Research and development of a new type of electrochemical biosensor for the detection of nucleotide sequences in DNA and of genotoxic agents in the environment. At present there is an increasing interest in devices (sensors, chips, etc.) suitable for rapid detection of a large number of nucleotide sequences in DNA and RNA, based on optical methods. It is the intention of this project to complement the optical detection by a more convenient and less expensive electrochemical one. DNA sensors and chips; nucleotide sequencing; DNA damage; nucleic acid electrochemistry	Research and development of a new type of electrochemical biosensor for the detection of nucleotide sequences in DNA and of genotoxic agents in the environment. At present there is an increasing interest in devices (sensors, chips, etc.) suitable for rapid detection of a large number of nucleotide sequences in DNA and RNA, based on optical methods. It is the intention of this project to complement the optical detection by a more convenient and less expensive electrochemical one. DNA sensors and chips; nucleotide sequencing; DNA damage; nucleic acid electrochemistry
Research and development of a protection system against harmful ionizing radiation utilizing waste raw materials. Research and development of a new, progressive, comlex system of materials for protection against harmful ionizing radiation potential using secondary industrial raw materials. The new technology of complex protection system will contain especially thinlayer, thin-walled and thick walled products on the base of mortars for concrete or painting systems with significant screening properties. protection; ionizing radiation; technology	Research and development of a protection system against harmful ionizing radiation utilizing waste raw materials. Research and development of a new, progressive, comlex system of materials for protection against harmful ionizing radiation potential using secondary industrial raw materials. The new technology of complex protection system will contain especially thinlayer, thin-walled and thick walled products on the base of mortars for concrete or painting systems with significant screening properties. protection; ionizing radiation; technology
The technology of fabrication of the iron(III) oxide nanoparticles. The technology of fabrication of the iron(III) oxide nanoparticles. iron(III) oxide; nanoparticles	The technology of fabrication of the iron(III) oxide nanoparticles. The technology of fabrication of the iron(III) oxide nanoparticles. iron(III) oxide; nanoparticles
Current biotechnologies for research and development of diagnostic tools for prediction of therapy response in breast cancer patients. Development of complex diagnostic system for prediction of breast cancer patient response to therapy (preliminary named PredictBreast). The product will consist of combined immunohistochemical and genetic (FISH) kit for evaluation of Her-2/neu status anddetection system for examination of steroid receptors (ER and PR) applicable in routine clinical practice. breast cancer; predictive oncology; diagnostics; immunohistochemistry; Her-2/neu	Current biotechnologies for research and development of diagnostic tools for prediction of therapy response in breast cancer patients. Development of complex diagnostic system for prediction of breast cancer patient response to therapy (preliminary named PredictBreast). The product will consist of combined immunohistochemical and genetic (FISH) kit for evaluation of Her-2/neu status anddetection system for examination of steroid receptors (ER and PR) applicable in routine clinical practice. breast cancer; predictive oncology; diagnostics; immunohistochemistry; Her-2/neu
Development of cold rolling technology for bearings rings. Development of cold rolling technology for bearings rings for select assortiment of production programm company ZKL Brno, a.s. for outer diameter from 120 mm to 250 mm and width to 80 mm. cold rolling; bearings rings	Development of cold rolling technology for bearings rings. Development of cold rolling technology for bearings rings for select assortiment of production programm company ZKL Brno, a.s. for outer diameter from 120 mm to 250 mm and width to 80 mm. cold rolling; bearings rings
*The research and verification of a regeneration technology of volatile acids from acid cleaning, polishing and eloxal coating sludge in a pilot-scale unit. *The research and verification of a regeneration technology of volatile acids from acid cleaning, polishing and eloxal coating sludge in a pilot-scale unit. pickling; pickling baths; mixed pickling baths; regeneration; nitric acid; hydrofluoric acid; hydrochloric acid	*The research and verification of a regeneration technology of volatile acids from acid cleaning, polishing and eloxal coating sludge in a pilot-scale unit. *The research and verification of a regeneration technology of volatile acids from acid cleaning, polishing and eloxal coating sludge in a pilot-scale unit. pickling; pickling baths; mixed pickling baths; regeneration; nitric acid; hydrofluoric acid; hydrochloric acid
Innovation of SADS decentralized system, protection, automatization and telecontrol systems, communication units, monitors and energy meters for electroenergy on the basis of embedded PC with VxWorks real time operation system. Innovation of SADS decentralized system, protection, automatization and telecontrol systems, communication units, monitors and energy meters for electroenergy on the basis of embedded PC with VxWorks real time operation system. SADS; telecontrol systems; protection; Vx Works	Innovation of SADS decentralized system, protection, automatization and telecontrol systems, communication units, monitors and energy meters for electroenergy on the basis of embedded PC with VxWorks real time operation system. Innovation of SADS decentralized system, protection, automatization and telecontrol systems, communication units, monitors and energy meters for electroenergy on the basis of embedded PC with VxWorks real time operation system. SADS; telecontrol systems; protection; Vx Works
*Planar heating elements. *The project concerns thick film heating elements on stainless steel. They are prosuced by screen printing and firing dieletric, resistive and conductive films. Their flat form, low mass and quick response makes them suitable for broad application fields. They can be supplied from low voltage sources and from mains as well. heating elements on steel, thik films; metallic substrates; screen printing; firing; multiplied film structures	*Planar heating elements. *The project concerns thick film heating elements on stainless steel. They are prosuced by screen printing and firing dieletric, resistive and conductive films. Their flat form, low mass and quick response makes them suitable for broad application fields. They can be supplied from low voltage sources and from mains as well. heating elements on steel, thik films; metallic substrates; screen printing; firing; multiplied film structures
Low temperature cofired ceramics (LTCC). The project concerns low temperature co-fired ceramics. The technology of 3D multilevel conductor structures will be developed. Ceramic green sjeets will be metallised by scren printing, stacked and precisely laminated to align the conductor structures.The selection of materials will make it possible to co-fire the whole of the structure at the same and low temperature. The process steps and materials used enable further integration processes, e.g. photo-etched film structures, embedded componenets etc. LTCC; laminated ceramics; Co-firing; metallisation; thick films; microelectronics; interconnections	Low temperature cofired ceramics (LTCC). The project concerns low temperature co-fired ceramics. The technology of 3D multilevel conductor structures will be developed. Ceramic green sjeets will be metallised by scren printing, stacked and precisely laminated to align the conductor structures.The selection of materials will make it possible to co-fire the whole of the structure at the same and low temperature. The process steps and materials used enable further integration processes, e.g. photo-etched film structures, embedded componenets etc. LTCC; laminated ceramics; Co-firing; metallisation; thick films; microelectronics; interconnections
Horizontal high speed machine. Design, production, assembly and testing of two four-axis machining center. The first version is a machine with a horizontal floating axes, then second version a machine with conventional design. machine tools; horizontal machining center; horizontal milling machine; HSC/HSM high speed cutting; floatin principle	Horizontal high speed machine. Design, production, assembly and testing of two four-axis machining center. The first version is a machine with a horizontal floating axes, then second version a machine with conventional design. machine tools; horizontal machining center; horizontal milling machine; HSC/HSM high speed cutting; floatin principle
Application of CFD codes ion research of fluid behavior of nuclear reactor. The proposed project is focused on research of thermo-hydraulic (TH) processes, which occur in nuclear reactors during accident conditions. In the research, CFD codes will be applied to analyze experimental data and key TH phenomena. Main purpose of thisresearch is enhancing of nuclear reactor safety and reducing of radiation hazard during potential nuclear power plant accidents. CFD; nuclear; VVER; RPV head; nuclear safety	Application of CFD codes ion research of fluid behavior of nuclear reactor. The proposed project is focused on research of thermo-hydraulic (TH) processes, which occur in nuclear reactors during accident conditions. In the research, CFD codes will be applied to analyze experimental data and key TH phenomena. Main purpose of thisresearch is enhancing of nuclear reactor safety and reducing of radiation hazard during potential nuclear power plant accidents. CFD; nuclear; VVER; RPV head; nuclear safety
Way technologically and ecologically acceptable processing waste plastics on commercial utilizable products. Way technologically and ecologically acceptable processing waste plastics on commercial utilizable products. waste polyamide polymers; reticulose polymers; rubber; recycling; devolcaniation; base material; catalyzer	Way technologically and ecologically acceptable processing waste plastics on commercial utilizable products. Way technologically and ecologically acceptable processing waste plastics on commercial utilizable products. waste polyamide polymers; reticulose polymers; rubber; recycling; devolcaniation; base material; catalyzer
*Weawing machine CAMEL CLASIC. *Subject of the project solution consists in implementation of comprehensive research-developing intention, target of which is development of jet weaving machine for the production of technical fabrics, they enable weaving of classical weaves, i.e. basic, derivative, shafts. jet weawing machine; technical fabrics	*Weawing machine CAMEL CLASIC. *Subject of the project solution consists in implementation of comprehensive research-developing intention, target of which is development of jet weaving machine for the production of technical fabrics, they enable weaving of classical weaves, i.e. basic, derivative, shafts. jet weawing machine; technical fabrics
Use of advanced neutron and photon detectors in the applied research for the evaluation of monitoring, safety and reliability of nuclear utilities. Use of advanced neutron and photon detectors in the applied research for the evaluation of monitoring, safety and reliability of nuclear utilities. MEDIPIX detectors; Si gamma spectrometer; mixed radiation fields; optimized neutron source - beam of reactor	Use of advanced neutron and photon detectors in the applied research for the evaluation of monitoring, safety and reliability of nuclear utilities. Use of advanced neutron and photon detectors in the applied research for the evaluation of monitoring, safety and reliability of nuclear utilities. MEDIPIX detectors; Si gamma spectrometer; mixed radiation fields; optimized neutron source - beam of reactor
Development of advanced new generation tools for implementation and intensive exploatation of advanced nuclear fuel designs in Czech nuclear reactors. Development of advanced new generation tools for reactor physics and thermal-dynamics. Special emphasis is excerted on modularity and flexibility of the new coomputer code complex. Such approach will allow for an efficient solution of tasks related to implementation and intensive exploatation of advanced nuclear fuel designs in current Czech nuclear reactors as well as as core phasis and dynamics of Generation 4 reactor concepts, mainly high temperature grapfite-gas-cooled and super-critical reactors. nuclear reactor; generation 4	Development of advanced new generation tools for implementation and intensive exploatation of advanced nuclear fuel designs in Czech nuclear reactors. Development of advanced new generation tools for reactor physics and thermal-dynamics. Special emphasis is excerted on modularity and flexibility of the new coomputer code complex. Such approach will allow for an efficient solution of tasks related to implementation and intensive exploatation of advanced nuclear fuel designs in current Czech nuclear reactors as well as as core phasis and dynamics of Generation 4 reactor concepts, mainly high temperature grapfite-gas-cooled and super-critical reactors. nuclear reactor; generation 4
Lympho- and hemodynamics complex regulation: Research and development of the textile devices including the development and introduction of the diagnostic measuring the medical support devices efficiency. The solution of the complex lympho- and hemodynamics diagnostics through the development of the new devices. The development is based on the steps: 1. Technical measuring of the effect of the devices on the human body 2. Sorting the medical devices intothe rank in compliance with their effects measure 3. Development of the new devices - more effective devices with the positive influence on the curing periods lenght. lympho- and hemodynamics complex regulation; new devices	Lympho- and hemodynamics complex regulation: Research and development of the textile devices including the development and introduction of the diagnostic measuring the medical support devices efficiency. The solution of the complex lympho- and hemodynamics diagnostics through the development of the new devices. The development is based on the steps: 1. Technical measuring of the effect of the devices on the human body 2. Sorting the medical devices intothe rank in compliance with their effects measure 3. Development of the new devices - more effective devices with the positive influence on the curing periods lenght. lympho- and hemodynamics complex regulation; new devices
*Development of Control Rod Drive Mechanism CRDM-M/3 for nuclear reactors. *Development, assembly and examination of a new generation CRDM-M/3 with enhanced technical parameters and extendet lifetime performed in ŠKODA JSs manufacturing and testing facilities. Verification of the new CRDM-M/3 in operation at an NPP followed byan evaluation of the operation results. control rod drive mechanism; CRD-M/3; nuclear power plant	*Development of Control Rod Drive Mechanism CRDM-M/3 for nuclear reactors. *Development, assembly and examination of a new generation CRDM-M/3 with enhanced technical parameters and extendet lifetime performed in ŠKODA JSs manufacturing and testing facilities. Verification of the new CRDM-M/3 in operation at an NPP followed byan evaluation of the operation results. control rod drive mechanism; CRD-M/3; nuclear power plant
Development of technology, material models, design methods and applications of fibre reinforced concrete. The project is directed to development and advances of knowledge of performance of fibre reinforced concrete structures, based on experimental research and resulting into development of new progressive methods and analytical tools suitable for realistic,reliable and economic design such structures. The aim of the project is development of computer programs and simplified engineering design methods resulting in recommendations intended for construction practice with a view to structural optimisation. fibre reinforced concrete; optimisation; experimental research of FRC	Development of technology, material models, design methods and applications of fibre reinforced concrete. The project is directed to development and advances of knowledge of performance of fibre reinforced concrete structures, based on experimental research and resulting into development of new progressive methods and analytical tools suitable for realistic,reliable and economic design such structures. The aim of the project is development of computer programs and simplified engineering design methods resulting in recommendations intended for construction practice with a view to structural optimisation. fibre reinforced concrete; optimisation; experimental research of FRC
Research and development of technology of production sputtering targets for CD and DVD by optimalising their recovery. Research of dependance quality surface of the nanolayer metal on polycarbonate pressed piece on technological and physical characteristic semifinished product for manufactoring data storage media - sputtering targets. Research technology of the measurement nanolayers on polycarbonate pressed piece. nanolayer; sputtering targets; metaliser; ellipsometry	Research and development of technology of production sputtering targets for CD and DVD by optimalising their recovery. Research of dependance quality surface of the nanolayer metal on polycarbonate pressed piece on technological and physical characteristic semifinished product for manufactoring data storage media - sputtering targets. Research technology of the measurement nanolayers on polycarbonate pressed piece. nanolayer; sputtering targets; metaliser; ellipsometry
*Universal high pressure waterjet device for cutting of all materials. *A modern CNC X-Y technological unit, which is working with high pressure waterjet in 2D and 3D applications- both for pure waterjet and for abrasive jet. The technological process uses maximum operation pressure both in static and dynamic regime of pump. A characteristic cutting process considers negative effects caused by physical principle of cutting medium. By means of mechanical construction and modern operation system (with an exclusive mathematic model) eliminates these effects. high pressure waterjet; CNC X-Y table for 2D and 3D applications; high pressure pump; swinging head	*Universal high pressure waterjet device for cutting of all materials. *A modern CNC X-Y technological unit, which is working with high pressure waterjet in 2D and 3D applications- both for pure waterjet and for abrasive jet. The technological process uses maximum operation pressure both in static and dynamic regime of pump. A characteristic cutting process considers negative effects caused by physical principle of cutting medium. By means of mechanical construction and modern operation system (with an exclusive mathematic model) eliminates these effects. high pressure waterjet; CNC X-Y table for 2D and 3D applications; high pressure pump; swinging head
*Research of advanced processes of waste reprocessing to alternative energy sources. *Research of suitable technological and economical reprocessing approaches of chosen industrial and communal waste into alternative energy sources. The project will focus on two wastes - plastics separated from mixed communal waste and waste sludge frompetroleum processing. alternative fuels; chlorinated plastics; high-temperature corrosion; dioxin; emission; petroleum sludge; pre-treatment; processing; combustion	*Research of advanced processes of waste reprocessing to alternative energy sources. *Research of suitable technological and economical reprocessing approaches of chosen industrial and communal waste into alternative energy sources. The project will focus on two wastes - plastics separated from mixed communal waste and waste sludge frompetroleum processing. alternative fuels; chlorinated plastics; high-temperature corrosion; dioxin; emission; petroleum sludge; pre-treatment; processing; combustion
Verification of model of threatening accident spreading and impact. Software enabling experts from chemical and petrochemical industry, state administration authorities, local authorities, inspoection authorities, Integrated tescue system branches and police to model effects reach of such disasters as explosions, dangersubstance outflouws and fire with a view to determine area for emergency planning and necessary evacuation area respectively. software; modelling; disaster reaches; disaster; substance outflow; environment prevention; model verification	Verification of model of threatening accident spreading and impact. Software enabling experts from chemical and petrochemical industry, state administration authorities, local authorities, inspoection authorities, Integrated tescue system branches and police to model effects reach of such disasters as explosions, dangersubstance outflouws and fire with a view to determine area for emergency planning and necessary evacuation area respectively. software; modelling; disaster reaches; disaster; substance outflow; environment prevention; model verification
*Automatic line for autothermal thermophilic aerobic hygienisation and stabilisation of sludges from municipal wastewater treatment plants - prototype research, development, manufacture and testing. *The development and research in the field of systems for the autothermal thermophilic aerobic hygienisation and stabilisation of sludges from municipal wastewater treatment plants (ATAD) provide for quick application of this method on municipal wastewater treatment plants sized for PE 5000 through PE 50000 in connection with the increasing pressures on the uses of hygienised sludges in the sphere of agricultural production. sewage sludges; aerobic stabilisation; autothermal thermophylic; hygienisation	*Automatic line for autothermal thermophilic aerobic hygienisation and stabilisation of sludges from municipal wastewater treatment plants - prototype research, development, manufacture and testing. *The development and research in the field of systems for the autothermal thermophilic aerobic hygienisation and stabilisation of sludges from municipal wastewater treatment plants (ATAD) provide for quick application of this method on municipal wastewater treatment plants sized for PE 5000 through PE 50000 in connection with the increasing pressures on the uses of hygienised sludges in the sphere of agricultural production. sewage sludges; aerobic stabilisation; autothermal thermophylic; hygienisation
Nanofibers and their composites for technical and biomedicine applications. Nanofibers and their composites for technical and biomedicine applications. electrospinning; nanofibers; biomedicine materials; composites	Nanofibers and their composites for technical and biomedicine applications. Nanofibers and their composites for technical and biomedicine applications. electrospinning; nanofibers; biomedicine materials; composites
Research and pilot verification of recycling technologies for radioactive contaminated metals in Czech Republic without build-up of specialized converting plant. Research and pilot verification of recycling technologies for radioactive contaminated metals in Czech Republic without build-up of specialized converting plant. It is expected, that the possibility of processing some sorts of contaminated metals temporary stored on territory of our country will be proved, mainly be means of experimental research. metallurgy; metal scrap; radioactive contamination; decontamination; environment; radiation protection	Research and pilot verification of recycling technologies for radioactive contaminated metals in Czech Republic without build-up of specialized converting plant. Research and pilot verification of recycling technologies for radioactive contaminated metals in Czech Republic without build-up of specialized converting plant. It is expected, that the possibility of processing some sorts of contaminated metals temporary stored on territory of our country will be proved, mainly be means of experimental research. metallurgy; metal scrap; radioactive contamination; decontamination; environment; radiation protection
The development and manufacture of a prototype of remonte - controlled hydraulic robot that makes possible work into the pipe of the dimension under 200 mm. The aim of project is belowtrading name KAWO Robot to develop, produce a fully functional prototype and introduce at the market a type of remote - controlled hydraulic robot that makes possible work into pipe of the dimension under 200 mm. hydraulic robot; pipe	The development and manufacture of a prototype of remonte - controlled hydraulic robot that makes possible work into the pipe of the dimension under 200 mm. The aim of project is belowtrading name KAWO Robot to develop, produce a fully functional prototype and introduce at the market a type of remote - controlled hydraulic robot that makes possible work into pipe of the dimension under 200 mm. hydraulic robot; pipe
*Research and development of combined systems of heating with ecological energy sources. *Research of effective combined systems of house heating with power output ranging from 5 to 220 kW. Main target is to resolve a system with more sources of ecological renewable energy, and with its dominant part is power consumtion. combined system of heating; renewable sources of energy; ecology	*Research and development of combined systems of heating with ecological energy sources. *Research of effective combined systems of house heating with power output ranging from 5 to 220 kW. Main target is to resolve a system with more sources of ecological renewable energy, and with its dominant part is power consumtion. combined system of heating; renewable sources of energy; ecology
Nanodispersion oxides and hydroxides of Ti, Fe, Al, Zn, and Zr for decomposition of chemical warfare agents. Preparation and characterization of nanodispersive oxides and oxide-hydroxides Ti, Fe, Al, Zn, and Zrand binary systems Ti-Al, Ti-Fe, Ti-Zn, Ti-Zr, Al-Fe, Al-Zn, Al-Zr, Fe-Zn, Fe-Zr and Zn-Zr, optimalization synthesis on dependence condition reaction, charakterization of prepared samples with method SEM, HRTEM, RTG, DTA-TG, BET nd porosity, and determination detoxificcation activity towards chemical warfare agents - sarin (GB), soman (GD), sulphur mustard and VX-agent. nanodispersion oxides; detoxification activity; chemical warfare agents; anatase; ferrihydrite	Nanodispersion oxides and hydroxides of Ti, Fe, Al, Zn, and Zr for decomposition of chemical warfare agents. Preparation and characterization of nanodispersive oxides and oxide-hydroxides Ti, Fe, Al, Zn, and Zrand binary systems Ti-Al, Ti-Fe, Ti-Zn, Ti-Zr, Al-Fe, Al-Zn, Al-Zr, Fe-Zn, Fe-Zr and Zn-Zr, optimalization synthesis on dependence condition reaction, charakterization of prepared samples with method SEM, HRTEM, RTG, DTA-TG, BET nd porosity, and determination detoxificcation activity towards chemical warfare agents - sarin (GB), soman (GD), sulphur mustard and VX-agent. nanodispersion oxides; detoxification activity; chemical warfare agents; anatase; ferrihydrite
New generation of durale concrete structures with increased resistance against aggresive actions. Development of modern concrete structures of high durability and life cycle and application of non-metal materials in the building industry in the field of concrete structures reinforcement. Next output involves application of non-metal elements in the field of masonry, timber and metal structures. composite materials; non-metal reinforcement; carbon fibres; glass fibres; basalt fibres; concrete structure	New generation of durale concrete structures with increased resistance against aggresive actions. Development of modern concrete structures of high durability and life cycle and application of non-metal materials in the building industry in the field of concrete structures reinforcement. Next output involves application of non-metal elements in the field of masonry, timber and metal structures. composite materials; non-metal reinforcement; carbon fibres; glass fibres; basalt fibres; concrete structure
Objective preparation of new types of high-density polyethylene (HDPE) with respect to the selected application. Objective preparation of new types of high-density polyethylene (HDPE) with respect to the selected application. HDPE; catalyst; polymerization process; structural and fracture estimation	Objective preparation of new types of high-density polyethylene (HDPE) with respect to the selected application. Objective preparation of new types of high-density polyethylene (HDPE) with respect to the selected application. HDPE; catalyst; polymerization process; structural and fracture estimation
Value for money increasing of recycled plastics (composites) based on PET. The project of thermoplastic composites based on the recycled PET, mainly from the used Bottles. It is focused on the composites with glass fibres and possibly other inorganic fillers also. The goal is to prepare such materials with advantageous combinatageous combination of properties, utilizing especially high stiffness of the PET composites. As to the applications, the use in building industry, mechanical engineering and electro technical industry is supposed. PET; glass fibres; inorganic fillers; recycling; stiffness; recycled material; building industry	Value for money increasing of recycled plastics (composites) based on PET. The project of thermoplastic composites based on the recycled PET, mainly from the used Bottles. It is focused on the composites with glass fibres and possibly other inorganic fillers also. The goal is to prepare such materials with advantageous combinatageous combination of properties, utilizing especially high stiffness of the PET composites. As to the applications, the use in building industry, mechanical engineering and electro technical industry is supposed. PET; glass fibres; inorganic fillers; recycling; stiffness; recycled material; building industry
Energy Savings by Industrial Refrigeration Plants The aim of the project is to contribute at the theoretical level to energy savings by operation of industrial refrigeration plants. They can be achieved either by a reduction of power consumption (focused in the 1st part of the project) or by utilisation Industrial refrigeration plants; energy consumption; ammonia	Energy Savings by Industrial Refrigeration Plants The aim of the project is to contribute at the theoretical level to energy savings by operation of industrial refrigeration plants. They can be achieved either by a reduction of power consumption (focused in the 1st part of the project) or by utilisation Industrial refrigeration plants; energy consumption; ammonia
A systemic approach to reducing the environmental burden in relation to the construction and operation of buildings, with an emphasis on construction and energy aspects The goal of this project is to select optimum measures and recommendations for reducing energy and material consumption while also reducing the greenhouse gas burden in the construction industry (new construction, conversion, operation and removal of bui energy-efficient home; optimizing energy use in the construction industry; reducing the environmental burden in the construction industry; energy audit of buildings; construction and energy concept; optimizing energy use in buildings	A systemic approach to reducing the environmental burden in relation to the construction and operation of buildings, with an emphasis on construction and energy aspects The goal of this project is to select optimum measures and recommendations for reducing energy and material consumption while also reducing the greenhouse gas burden in the construction industry (new construction, conversion, operation and removal of bui energy-efficient home; optimizing energy use in the construction industry; reducing the environmental burden in the construction industry; energy audit of buildings; construction and energy concept; optimizing energy use in buildings
Research on influence of photovoltaic systems on environment and on operation of public grid Influence of photovoltaic systems onto environment represent an important aspect at income assessment.While operation of PV systems alone is free of negativ effects, a production and disposal of needed parts of systems represents certain incidence of environment.Research is focused on determination of PV systems influence on environment through the whole life cycle. The knowledge of present status will be as a background for the research work focused for minimalization of PV system influence on environment.Simutaneously there will be investigated an impact of PV systems on operation of public grid. Subsequently will be carried out a research and development of measures for minimalization of these impacts. Photovoltaic system; life cycle analysis; photovoltaic; photovoltaic R&D, environment, public grid	Research on influence of photovoltaic systems on environment and on operation of public grid Influence of photovoltaic systems onto environment represent an important aspect at income assessment.While operation of PV systems alone is free of negativ effects, a production and disposal of needed parts of systems represents certain incidence of environment.Research is focused on determination of PV systems influence on environment through the whole life cycle. The knowledge of present status will be as a background for the research work focused for minimalization of PV system influence on environment.Simutaneously there will be investigated an impact of PV systems on operation of public grid. Subsequently will be carried out a research and development of measures for minimalization of these impacts. Photovoltaic system; life cycle analysis; photovoltaic; photovoltaic R&D, environment, public grid
Research and development of interactive map of systems installations with renewable energy sources in the Czech Republic, focused on energy production from wind, water and sun How is the society informed about RES has an important influence on decision making in the area of public administration, stakeholders, on new technology development and general intelligence.One of the most impoertant aspect of information is the generalavailability. This is possible to reach thank to new communication technology and Internet and so make the information available to anybody from anywhere.Project is focused on establishing the information database of RES including information about theirrunning with wide interactive functions.The database will be available to general public through the Internet and will make further adding of new RES installation possible. Photovoltaic system; renewable energy sources; photovoltaic R&D, environment, public grid; public administration; interactive map	Research and development of interactive map of systems installations with renewable energy sources in the Czech Republic, focused on energy production from wind, water and sun How is the society informed about RES has an important influence on decision making in the area of public administration, stakeholders, on new technology development and general intelligence.One of the most impoertant aspect of information is the generalavailability. This is possible to reach thank to new communication technology and Internet and so make the information available to anybody from anywhere.Project is focused on establishing the information database of RES including information about theirrunning with wide interactive functions.The database will be available to general public through the Internet and will make further adding of new RES installation possible. Photovoltaic system; renewable energy sources; photovoltaic R&D, environment, public grid; public administration; interactive map
Research and development of hybrid energetic systém with RES with the option of autonomous running and study of their application potential in the conditions of the Czech Republic With respect of comming season of lack of standard energy sources and their price rising the trend of RES usin is comming back.Current RES systems are usually composed as systems with only one kind of RES and they are either stand alone systems or all-grid connected.Research is focused on possibilities of efficient combinations of RES for middle-sized units and on spreading of pracitical knowledge, getting new experience and designing a proposals in the area of using RESDuring the time when the projectis running a suitable object will be find, where physical experimental model is applied, in the frame of which another kinds of applications with using RES or storage will be tested Hybrid systém; energy storage; environment; renewable energy sources; autonomous running	Research and development of hybrid energetic systém with RES with the option of autonomous running and study of their application potential in the conditions of the Czech Republic With respect of comming season of lack of standard energy sources and their price rising the trend of RES usin is comming back.Current RES systems are usually composed as systems with only one kind of RES and they are either stand alone systems or all-grid connected.Research is focused on possibilities of efficient combinations of RES for middle-sized units and on spreading of pracitical knowledge, getting new experience and designing a proposals in the area of using RESDuring the time when the projectis running a suitable object will be find, where physical experimental model is applied, in the frame of which another kinds of applications with using RES or storage will be tested Hybrid systém; energy storage; environment; renewable energy sources; autonomous running
Unequal access to education: the extent, sources, social and economic consequences, policy strategies. A vast number of studies conducted by the OECD and World Bank has well-documented that the Czech Republic belongs to countries with the highest level of inequality in access to higher education among the OECD countries. The primary purpose of this project is to identify main causes of unequal access to higher education in the Czech Republic. Using already existing sets of longitudinal data, a number of follow-up surveys will be carried out to examine two relevant cohorts: students finishing compulsory school attendance in 2003 (a panel of respondents assembled for the PISA 2003 project) and first-year university students. The analysis of this data will unweil the underlying causes of educational inaqualities and their reproduction. The project will conclude with a monograph and suggestions of educational reforms pertaining to the solution of the problem. inequality; education; social cohesion; social justice; educational policy; human rerourcis; longitudinal serveyes	Unequal access to education: the extent, sources, social and economic consequences, policy strategies. A vast number of studies conducted by the OECD and World Bank has well-documented that the Czech Republic belongs to countries with the highest level of inequality in access to higher education among the OECD countries. The primary purpose of this project is to identify main causes of unequal access to higher education in the Czech Republic. Using already existing sets of longitudinal data, a number of follow-up surveys will be carried out to examine two relevant cohorts: students finishing compulsory school attendance in 2003 (a panel of respondents assembled for the PISA 2003 project) and first-year university students. The analysis of this data will unweil the underlying causes of educational inaqualities and their reproduction. The project will conclude with a monograph and suggestions of educational reforms pertaining to the solution of the problem. inequality; education; social cohesion; social justice; educational policy; human rerourcis; longitudinal serveyes
Political actors in the process of Europeanization and internationalization of the Czech political area The project aims to disclose which relevant actors are able to absorb and effectively evaluate information inflow, so as to implement it actively into their own activities and structures and to successfully defend their interests. Moreover, it intends tofind out whether these actors have developed a system of evaluation and whether they can amend their strategies and structures. europeizace; zájmové skupiny; integrace; politické sítě; transformace	Political actors in the process of Europeanization and internationalization of the Czech political area The project aims to disclose which relevant actors are able to absorb and effectively evaluate information inflow, so as to implement it actively into their own activities and structures and to successfully defend their interests. Moreover, it intends tofind out whether these actors have developed a system of evaluation and whether they can amend their strategies and structures. europeizace; zájmové skupiny; integrace; politické sítě; transformace
Political and legal institutional framework of the Czech Republic and its changes in the context of the accession to the EU The project examines the legal and institutional environment in the Czech Republic, the effect of the most prominent collective actors prior to its accession to the European Union, and changes that are occurring due to the process of Europeanisation. Theproject explores new challenges resulting from the full integration of the Czech Republic into the EU political and decision-making mechanisms, the creation of mechanisms to influence European and national politics, and the impact of collective actors wiithin a pan-European political arena. legal system; European integration; participation; epresentation; political parties; interest groups; social dialogue; minorities	Political and legal institutional framework of the Czech Republic and its changes in the context of the accession to the EU The project examines the legal and institutional environment in the Czech Republic, the effect of the most prominent collective actors prior to its accession to the European Union, and changes that are occurring due to the process of Europeanisation. Theproject explores new challenges resulting from the full integration of the Czech Republic into the EU political and decision-making mechanisms, the creation of mechanisms to influence European and national politics, and the impact of collective actors wiithin a pan-European political arena. legal system; European integration; participation; epresentation; political parties; interest groups; social dialogue; minorities
Methodical procedure of social and ecological links assessment with economic transformation: theory and application Project is responding to a state, when is missing a methodological procedure, which would supported decision making sphere to optimally decide about development of region with respect to natural and social potential and landscape carrying capacity. In sequence, definitions of biotic, ecological, social, cultural and legislative limits territorial development, natural and social potential territory and landscape carrying capacity is principal objective of the project (theoretic part). Principal output ofthe project will be standardized methodical procedure, which will be point to finding an optimum socioeconomic development of locations, with regard to social needs and requirements for sustainable development (practical part). Methodical procedure willbe applied on model locations, published in monographs, made public on seminars for specialists from practice and presented on www pages. modelové mikroregiony; přírodní potenciál území; sociální potenciál území; únosnost krajiny; regionální a lokální politika	Methodical procedure of social and ecological links assessment with economic transformation: theory and application Project is responding to a state, when is missing a methodological procedure, which would supported decision making sphere to optimally decide about development of region with respect to natural and social potential and landscape carrying capacity. In sequence, definitions of biotic, ecological, social, cultural and legislative limits territorial development, natural and social potential territory and landscape carrying capacity is principal objective of the project (theoretic part). Principal output ofthe project will be standardized methodical procedure, which will be point to finding an optimum socioeconomic development of locations, with regard to social needs and requirements for sustainable development (practical part). Methodical procedure willbe applied on model locations, published in monographs, made public on seminars for specialists from practice and presented on www pages. modelové mikroregiony; přírodní potenciál území; sociální potenciál území; únosnost krajiny; regionální a lokální politika
Violence at the work place in the field of health and social services in the Czech Republic The aim of this work is to objectify the problems and causes of violence in healthcare and social service workplaces in the context of current social changes (modernisation of society) and the related reform of both of the studied public services segments. Increasing violence in general, and at the work place, is an alarming world-wide phenomenon. The objectification of its causes is seen as one of the solutions to this society-wide problem. Our research and the related analysis use quantitative and qualitative sociological methods (standardised questionnaire survey, focus groups), policy analysis methods and secondary analysis of data available in the sphere of the quality of healthcare and social services. The project uses a broader concept of violence at the workplace, not only as a threat to staff in their interaction with patients and clients, but also studies the external and internal contexts of their work conditions (organisation and financing of services, management processes). violence at work; physical and psychological violence; healthcare and social services	Violence at the work place in the field of health and social services in the Czech Republic The aim of this work is to objectify the problems and causes of violence in healthcare and social service workplaces in the context of current social changes (modernisation of society) and the related reform of both of the studied public services segments. Increasing violence in general, and at the work place, is an alarming world-wide phenomenon. The objectification of its causes is seen as one of the solutions to this society-wide problem. Our research and the related analysis use quantitative and qualitative sociological methods (standardised questionnaire survey, focus groups), policy analysis methods and secondary analysis of data available in the sphere of the quality of healthcare and social services. The project uses a broader concept of violence at the workplace, not only as a threat to staff in their interaction with patients and clients, but also studies the external and internal contexts of their work conditions (organisation and financing of services, management processes). violence at work; physical and psychological violence; healthcare and social services
Socio-economical development of Czech countryside and agriculture Research of social-economic phenomena and processes in Czech countryside with regard of living conditions in rural areas, stabilization of rural settlement, creation of prerequisites for sustainable social and economic development in European context. Czech Republic; Rural development; rural inhabitants; agriculture; regional development; co-operative strategies	Socio-economical development of Czech countryside and agriculture Research of social-economic phenomena and processes in Czech countryside with regard of living conditions in rural areas, stabilization of rural settlement, creation of prerequisites for sustainable social and economic development in European context. Czech Republic; Rural development; rural inhabitants; agriculture; regional development; co-operative strategies
Adult education in various stages of the life cycle: priroties, opportunities and possibilites of development The project deals with adult education in the framework of life-long learning. It maps and analyses the situation of the educational offer and needs of the Czech adult population, both generally and in particularities, as in view of dominant life roles. adult education; knowledge society; formal education; non-formal education	Adult education in various stages of the life cycle: priroties, opportunities and possibilites of development The project deals with adult education in the framework of life-long learning. It maps and analyses the situation of the educational offer and needs of the Czech adult population, both generally and in particularities, as in view of dominant life roles. adult education; knowledge society; formal education; non-formal education
Measurement of the Quality of Working Life The objective of this project is to establish and then to test a set of indicators measuring the quality of working life in enterprise environment. This procedure can help to develop enterprises´ feeling of social responsibility. quality of working life; working conditions; job satisfaction; social responsibility	Measurement of the Quality of Working Life The objective of this project is to establish and then to test a set of indicators measuring the quality of working life in enterprise environment. This procedure can help to develop enterprises´ feeling of social responsibility. quality of working life; working conditions; job satisfaction; social responsibility
The Risk of a Brain in the Czech Republic. The project is designed to identify the scale of potential labour migration from the CR among selected gualified groups of experts after the CR joins the EU and in the future conditions of free movement of labour. labour migration from CR; free movement of labour; gualified labour; modelling experts' needs; income differentiation; brain drain; qualified public-sector labour; private-sector labour	The Risk of a Brain in the Czech Republic. The project is designed to identify the scale of potential labour migration from the CR among selected gualified groups of experts after the CR joins the EU and in the future conditions of free movement of labour. labour migration from CR; free movement of labour; gualified labour; modelling experts' needs; income differentiation; brain drain; qualified public-sector labour; private-sector labour
Knowledge Society - Requirements on Human Resources Skills and Continuing Training Analysis of the CR's position as to what extent it corresponds to the characteristics of knowledge-based society (KBS), to what extent the quality intensive activities are represented, what are the key preconditions to the CR?s transition to KBS. The keyrole in the transition is played by life-long learning, incl. continuing training (CT). The analysis focuses on the participation of skill and occupation groups in CT, and on the approaches of innovative companies to skill improvements. A medium-term forrecast of skill needs will be made and its results confronted with the other outputs within the project. The analytical background will be based on secondary analyses of research sources and its results verified in focus groups. Further methods include international comparison, statistical analysis, company survey, case study, forecast model of skill needs, and qualitative analysis. Innovation intensity; Skill intensity; Human resources; Life-long learning; Continuing education; Skill needs forecast; Employment policy; Education policy; Job futures	Knowledge Society - Requirements on Human Resources Skills and Continuing Training Analysis of the CR's position as to what extent it corresponds to the characteristics of knowledge-based society (KBS), to what extent the quality intensive activities are represented, what are the key preconditions to the CR?s transition to KBS. The keyrole in the transition is played by life-long learning, incl. continuing training (CT). The analysis focuses on the participation of skill and occupation groups in CT, and on the approaches of innovative companies to skill improvements. A medium-term forrecast of skill needs will be made and its results confronted with the other outputs within the project. The analytical background will be based on secondary analyses of research sources and its results verified in focus groups. Further methods include international comparison, statistical analysis, company survey, case study, forecast model of skill needs, and qualitative analysis. Innovation intensity; Skill intensity; Human resources; Life-long learning; Continuing education; Skill needs forecast; Employment policy; Education policy; Job futures
Influence of the computerization on the educational processes and on the human´s personality in the information society 1. determine the development of the new information and communication technologies: a) in the different types of schools, different levels of the educational system, in the life-long learning, including self-education, b) overall develompment in the population. 2. influence of the new technologies on the content and form of the education (didactics). 3. influence of the new technologies on the human´s life field and the human´s life in the different life phases in general. 4. Influence of the new technologies on the life´s field and the human´s life style. The problems have interdisciplinar character and the empirical findings will be gathered by means of the sociological, pedagogical and psychological research methods and techniques. terciární vzdělávání; celoživotní učení; digitalizace; boloňský proces; e-learning; digitální přehrada; computerizace; virtuální	Influence of the computerization on the educational processes and on the human´s personality in the information society 1. determine the development of the new information and communication technologies: a) in the different types of schools, different levels of the educational system, in the life-long learning, including self-education, b) overall develompment in the population. 2. influence of the new technologies on the content and form of the education (didactics). 3. influence of the new technologies on the human´s life field and the human´s life in the different life phases in general. 4. Influence of the new technologies on the life´s field and the human´s life style. The problems have interdisciplinar character and the empirical findings will be gathered by means of the sociological, pedagogical and psychological research methods and techniques. terciární vzdělávání; celoživotní učení; digitalizace; boloňský proces; e-learning; digitální přehrada; computerizace; virtuální
Family, Partnerships, and Population Ageing (Generations and Gender Survey: prospective longitudinal study) The aim of the project is to carry out a survey within the Generations and Gender Programme coordinated by PAU UNECE in Geneva. The Generations and Gender Survey (GGS) is a cross-national, highly comparative, multidisciplinary and longitudinal programme.The goal of the GGS is to investigate the dynamics of the family from its formation to its dissolution and the family relationships; i.e. it deals with several stages of the life-cycle. The survey will focus on gathering information concerning child-pareent and partner-partner relationships of individuals, as well as the individual factors context data. The results and their analysis will help to consider the current demographic patterns in the Czech Republic within the European framework and to designthe public policy measures. survey; population; family; elderly; gender; policy; generations	Family, Partnerships, and Population Ageing (Generations and Gender Survey: prospective longitudinal study) The aim of the project is to carry out a survey within the Generations and Gender Programme coordinated by PAU UNECE in Geneva. The Generations and Gender Survey (GGS) is a cross-national, highly comparative, multidisciplinary and longitudinal programme.The goal of the GGS is to investigate the dynamics of the family from its formation to its dissolution and the family relationships; i.e. it deals with several stages of the life-cycle. The survey will focus on gathering information concerning child-pareent and partner-partner relationships of individuals, as well as the individual factors context data. The results and their analysis will help to consider the current demographic patterns in the Czech Republic within the European framework and to designthe public policy measures. survey; population; family; elderly; gender; policy; generations
Socio-economic, Sociological and Demographic Conditions for Maintenance and Development of Rural Areas During the research factors will be identified and data will be collected to assess and evaluate enviromental, economic and social conditions, which significantly influence rural development and determine settlement (e.m.migration in rural areas). Application of the research results on practical concept creation work of policies focused on the sustainable rural development. Rural Development; Agriculture; Regional Development; Sustainable Development; Socio-economic Conditions; Rural Demographic Changes	Socio-economic, Sociological and Demographic Conditions for Maintenance and Development of Rural Areas During the research factors will be identified and data will be collected to assess and evaluate enviromental, economic and social conditions, which significantly influence rural development and determine settlement (e.m.migration in rural areas). Application of the research results on practical concept creation work of policies focused on the sustainable rural development. Rural Development; Agriculture; Regional Development; Sustainable Development; Socio-economic Conditions; Rural Demographic Changes
Social and Cultural Cohesion in Differentiated Society The project is concerned with contemporary situation, evolution and prospects of future developments of social and cultural cohesion of Czech society, with the aim to propose strategies which would strengthen cohesion on macro, meso and microlevel. cohesion; exclusion; solidarity; trust; life strategies; social state; public policy; comparisons	Social and Cultural Cohesion in Differentiated Society The project is concerned with contemporary situation, evolution and prospects of future developments of social and cultural cohesion of Czech society, with the aim to propose strategies which would strengthen cohesion on macro, meso and microlevel. cohesion; exclusion; solidarity; trust; life strategies; social state; public policy; comparisons
Phenomenon of Rent-Seeking by Different Interest Groups and its Influence on Public Finance The submitted project is focused on the identification and quantification of the relationship between the general government budgets development and the level of public debt on the one hand and the differences or changes in the position of different interest groups in economy and society on the other hand. The part of the solution will be the evaluation of the influence of European integration and economic globalisation on the position of different interest groups. public finance; deficit; public debt; fiscal balance; rent-seeking; state aid; interest groups; institutional framework	Phenomenon of Rent-Seeking by Different Interest Groups and its Influence on Public Finance The submitted project is focused on the identification and quantification of the relationship between the general government budgets development and the level of public debt on the one hand and the differences or changes in the position of different interest groups in economy and society on the other hand. The part of the solution will be the evaluation of the influence of European integration and economic globalisation on the position of different interest groups. public finance; deficit; public debt; fiscal balance; rent-seeking; state aid; interest groups; institutional framework
Relations of the transformation of the labour market and forms of private, family and partnership life in Czech society. The goal of the project is to identify major changes on the labour market and to study their relations and impact on the organisation of the private life by the Czech population. The project will concentrate on the transformation of the forms of partnerships and family cohabitation, upbringing of children, pluralisation of life strategies and lifestyles; and will analyse the relationships between the work and family spheres and their mutual effect and inter-links in Czech society. Project results will contribute to explaining types of interactions between the changes on the labour market and the establishment of new forms of private, family and partnership relations of the Czech population, with an emphasis on changes and the creation of new forms of private, family and partnership life of various groups of Czech population and on the assessment of the life prospects, strategies and satisfaction of people. The results will be applicable in formulating relevant social policies. Labour market; Family; Partnerships; Parenthood; Work conditions; Social cohesion; Globalisation; Private life	Relations of the transformation of the labour market and forms of private, family and partnership life in Czech society. The goal of the project is to identify major changes on the labour market and to study their relations and impact on the organisation of the private life by the Czech population. The project will concentrate on the transformation of the forms of partnerships and family cohabitation, upbringing of children, pluralisation of life strategies and lifestyles; and will analyse the relationships between the work and family spheres and their mutual effect and inter-links in Czech society. Project results will contribute to explaining types of interactions between the changes on the labour market and the establishment of new forms of private, family and partnership relations of the Czech population, with an emphasis on changes and the creation of new forms of private, family and partnership life of various groups of Czech population and on the assessment of the life prospects, strategies and satisfaction of people. The results will be applicable in formulating relevant social policies. Labour market; Family; Partnerships; Parenthood; Work conditions; Social cohesion; Globalisation; Private life
The Causes and Mechanisms of the Creation of Educational Barriers of Different Sociocultural Background Members and the Formulation of the Strategies for their Surmounting. Research and analysis of characteristic features of the specific cultural system, of life and educational strategies of groups at risk of social exclusion - of asylum seekers, foreigners with a residence permit, citizens of socially excluded localities.The description and explanation of such phenomena as the rise of internal structures in monitored groups, the identification with the group, symbols of the group, group self-identification, the acceptance of internal models of the group by individuals. Value profiles, life satisfaction and the style of the monitored children. Research of the value of the child in the family, the conception of the family up-bringing. Explanation of the social, psychological and physical Social cohesion; sociocultural specificities; life and educational strategy; identification; self-identification; educational strategies	The Causes and Mechanisms of the Creation of Educational Barriers of Different Sociocultural Background Members and the Formulation of the Strategies for their Surmounting. Research and analysis of characteristic features of the specific cultural system, of life and educational strategies of groups at risk of social exclusion - of asylum seekers, foreigners with a residence permit, citizens of socially excluded localities.The description and explanation of such phenomena as the rise of internal structures in monitored groups, the identification with the group, symbols of the group, group self-identification, the acceptance of internal models of the group by individuals. Value profiles, life satisfaction and the style of the monitored children. Research of the value of the child in the family, the conception of the family up-bringing. Explanation of the social, psychological and physical Social cohesion; sociocultural specificities; life and educational strategy; identification; self-identification; educational strategies
The Influence of Labour world changes on the Quality of Life Perception of trends of the development of the quality of occupational life and the "health price" in the Czech Republic (empirical research). Proposal of appropriate instruments and opportunities to influence positively all actors in the sphere of occupational life. quality of working life; working conditions; health and safety at work; prevention of risks	The Influence of Labour world changes on the Quality of Life Perception of trends of the development of the quality of occupational life and the "health price" in the Czech Republic (empirical research). Proposal of appropriate instruments and opportunities to influence positively all actors in the sphere of occupational life. quality of working life; working conditions; health and safety at work; prevention of risks
Cross-border conditions affecting local communities in the Czech borderland. The objective is to identify the consequences of the cross-border interaction between inhabitants and institutions in the border areas with Germany, Austria, Poland and Slovakia. Emphasis is laid upon identifying the local foreign factors influencing thecondition and functioning of the social system in the Czech borderland, in particular on the ways of smoothing the existing inequalities or formation of the new ones, on the contribution of the joint cross-border activities to forming of the attitudes too the members of the neighboring nations and to the processes of integration of CR into EU. Using the methods of expert interviewing and representative questionnaire survey of the population, data shall be acquired, which will allow us answering the questions how the growing influence of foreign contacts and weakening traditional role of the state border are reflected in the area of formation of the regional and national identity of the Czech population and to what extent the cultures diffuse into each borderland; European integration; cross-border factors; cross-border assymetry; local community; national interest; public administration; Local culture	Cross-border conditions affecting local communities in the Czech borderland. The objective is to identify the consequences of the cross-border interaction between inhabitants and institutions in the border areas with Germany, Austria, Poland and Slovakia. Emphasis is laid upon identifying the local foreign factors influencing thecondition and functioning of the social system in the Czech borderland, in particular on the ways of smoothing the existing inequalities or formation of the new ones, on the contribution of the joint cross-border activities to forming of the attitudes too the members of the neighboring nations and to the processes of integration of CR into EU. Using the methods of expert interviewing and representative questionnaire survey of the population, data shall be acquired, which will allow us answering the questions how the growing influence of foreign contacts and weakening traditional role of the state border are reflected in the area of formation of the regional and national identity of the Czech population and to what extent the cultures diffuse into each borderland; European integration; cross-border factors; cross-border assymetry; local community; national interest; public administration; Local culture
Gender in management The difference between the job income of men and women continually reaches 25 ? 27% to the detriment of women and it is continually increasing. The greatest disparity is constantly reached in the category of leading and managing employees ? the ratio ofthe average wages of men and women reaches a value of only 54%. The ?Gender in Management? Project, through analyses of wage information in combination with the output of sociological surveys, will carry out the monitoring of these groups. gender; management; wage difference; discrimination; women	Gender in management The difference between the job income of men and women continually reaches 25 ? 27% to the detriment of women and it is continually increasing. The greatest disparity is constantly reached in the category of leading and managing employees ? the ratio ofthe average wages of men and women reaches a value of only 54%. The ?Gender in Management? Project, through analyses of wage information in combination with the output of sociological surveys, will carry out the monitoring of these groups. gender; management; wage difference; discrimination; women
The Socioeconomic Position of Self-Employed People in Society Employment in the Czech Republic until 1989 was almost entirely carried out on the basis of an employment relationship. During the 90s, in accordance with the transformation of the economy, a labour market was also created, on which conditions were created right at the beginning of the transformation for the performance of working activities also on the basis of self-employment. Self-employment is currently accompanied by many questions which concern the socioeconomic situation of self-employed people on the Czech labour market and in society, especially their income situation, social security and the deduction and tax burden of their incomes in comparison with a group of employees. The goal of the submitted project is thus to analyse and evaluate self-employment from the viewpoint of the aforementioned questions. self-employment; labour market; employment policy; income taxation; social security; social and health insurance	The Socioeconomic Position of Self-Employed People in Society Employment in the Czech Republic until 1989 was almost entirely carried out on the basis of an employment relationship. During the 90s, in accordance with the transformation of the economy, a labour market was also created, on which conditions were created right at the beginning of the transformation for the performance of working activities also on the basis of self-employment. Self-employment is currently accompanied by many questions which concern the socioeconomic situation of self-employed people on the Czech labour market and in society, especially their income situation, social security and the deduction and tax burden of their incomes in comparison with a group of employees. The goal of the submitted project is thus to analyse and evaluate self-employment from the viewpoint of the aforementioned questions. self-employment; labour market; employment policy; income taxation; social security; social and health insurance
Support of Elderly People Employment This project will evaluate the possibilities of elderly people employment on the labour market in the Czech Republic. Methodological approach is based n in-depth analyse, primary quantitative research of employers, elderly employees and the general public. Furthermore, the intermediate predictions focusing on possible solution will be prepared. population ageing; elderly people employment; labour market policy; retirement; economic activity lenthening	Support of Elderly People Employment This project will evaluate the possibilities of elderly people employment on the labour market in the Czech Republic. Methodological approach is based n in-depth analyse, primary quantitative research of employers, elderly employees and the general public. Furthermore, the intermediate predictions focusing on possible solution will be prepared. population ageing; elderly people employment; labour market policy; retirement; economic activity lenthening
Family, employment and education The project will contribute to seeking ways for family life and employment harmonisation, which is desirable in particular with respect to the objectives of family and social policies, equal opportunities of men and women, and employment policy. The objective of the research is to establish links between the microsocial (life strategy), mezzosocial (policies and their institutional context), and the macrosocial planes (value perception shifts, labour market development, and other changes). The concept of the project is based on theoretical studies of Czech and international authors and on secondary analysis of international (EVS, ISSP, GGS, OECD data, Eurofound) and Czech surveys (in particular surveys of the CSO, STEM and RILSA). The empirical part will use statistical data on employment, census, etc., and three empirical surveys ? a survey of family types of working-age population, probe of both parents with the youngest child up to a certain age, and a probe of employers. Family; Employment; Education; Harmonising work and family; Family policy; Demographic behaviour; Life-long education; Equal opportunities	Family, employment and education The project will contribute to seeking ways for family life and employment harmonisation, which is desirable in particular with respect to the objectives of family and social policies, equal opportunities of men and women, and employment policy. The objective of the research is to establish links between the microsocial (life strategy), mezzosocial (policies and their institutional context), and the macrosocial planes (value perception shifts, labour market development, and other changes). The concept of the project is based on theoretical studies of Czech and international authors and on secondary analysis of international (EVS, ISSP, GGS, OECD data, Eurofound) and Czech surveys (in particular surveys of the CSO, STEM and RILSA). The empirical part will use statistical data on employment, census, etc., and three empirical surveys ? a survey of family types of working-age population, probe of both parents with the youngest child up to a certain age, and a probe of employers. Family; Employment; Education; Harmonising work and family; Family policy; Demographic behaviour; Life-long education; Equal opportunities
With Multifunctionality Toward Sustainable Socioeconomic Conditions of the Czech Agriculture CZ Agric. multifunctions; non-market services valuation methods; envir. services valued by biotope values, restoration of rural areas by contrib. to employment, food quality by organic farming and animal welfare. Scenarios of CZ agric. policy. sustainable agriculture; socioeconomic conditions; multifunctionality; positive externalities; monetary valuation methods; European Model of agriculture; Czech agricult. policy in EU	With Multifunctionality Toward Sustainable Socioeconomic Conditions of the Czech Agriculture CZ Agric. multifunctions; non-market services valuation methods; envir. services valued by biotope values, restoration of rural areas by contrib. to employment, food quality by organic farming and animal welfare. Scenarios of CZ agric. policy. sustainable agriculture; socioeconomic conditions; multifunctionality; positive externalities; monetary valuation methods; European Model of agriculture; Czech agricult. policy in EU
Utilizing the experience of using the man-made landscape for the strategy of rural development The research topic is a social economic analysis of rural area in Chomutov, Most, Teplice and Ústí n. L. districts, which all obtained the significant influences from mining and industry activities. This analysis is base forthe paper ?Utilizing the experience of using the man-made landscape for the strategy of rural development?, aimed at an effective and environmental careful usage of landscape, use of agricultural-environmental measures, optimizing of farming production,rural business development andtourism development. It contributes to a sustainable landscape management. The base of research is to generalize a form of active management in landscape for support of externalities in the rural policy in theCzech Republic. The project brings a methodology suggestion of management in man-made landscape. social economic; aspectsrural development; agricultural-environmental; measurements; man-made area	Utilizing the experience of using the man-made landscape for the strategy of rural development The research topic is a social economic analysis of rural area in Chomutov, Most, Teplice and Ústí n. L. districts, which all obtained the significant influences from mining and industry activities. This analysis is base forthe paper ?Utilizing the experience of using the man-made landscape for the strategy of rural development?, aimed at an effective and environmental careful usage of landscape, use of agricultural-environmental measures, optimizing of farming production,rural business development andtourism development. It contributes to a sustainable landscape management. The base of research is to generalize a form of active management in landscape for support of externalities in the rural policy in theCzech Republic. The project brings a methodology suggestion of management in man-made landscape. social economic; aspectsrural development; agricultural-environmental; measurements; man-made area
International migration and Migrants ´s Illegal/Irregular Economic Activities in the Czech republic in a Broader Euroepan Context Illegal/irregular immigrant communities have become really numerous and, moreover, they may have important impacts upon various social structures of destination countries. Also the Czech Republic, currently having perhaps about 300,000 illegal/irregularimmigrants on its teritorry has quickly been shifting towards western models well-known from ?old? EU countries. The given issue has not been researched into yet too much in Czechia. Nevertheless, it is obvious that combating illegal/irregular activitiesis inavitable as it is also one of the key migration policy goals declared by the Czech Government. The proposed project proposal has two basic levels: 1) It is an attempt to more deeply research into a phenomenon of illegal/irregular migration and relatted economic activities in the Czech Republic, to get to know reasons for immigration, basic characteristics tied to migrants, their living style, and their probable future behaviour. survey; illegal; migrants; Europe; Czech Republic; qualitative research; Delphi method	International migration and Migrants ´s Illegal/Irregular Economic Activities in the Czech republic in a Broader Euroepan Context Illegal/irregular immigrant communities have become really numerous and, moreover, they may have important impacts upon various social structures of destination countries. Also the Czech Republic, currently having perhaps about 300,000 illegal/irregularimmigrants on its teritorry has quickly been shifting towards western models well-known from ?old? EU countries. The given issue has not been researched into yet too much in Czechia. Nevertheless, it is obvious that combating illegal/irregular activitiesis inavitable as it is also one of the key migration policy goals declared by the Czech Government. The proposed project proposal has two basic levels: 1) It is an attempt to more deeply research into a phenomenon of illegal/irregular migration and relatted economic activities in the Czech Republic, to get to know reasons for immigration, basic characteristics tied to migrants, their living style, and their probable future behaviour. survey; illegal; migrants; Europe; Czech Republic; qualitative research; Delphi method
The Influence of Interaction between Tax and Benefit System to Low Earner Groups The goal of this project is trough the coefficients of effectiveness tax rates (marginal and average) to describe real impacts of the interaction between tax and benefit system to particular types of households and influence to unemployment of low earnergroups and indirectly to their availability of social inclusion. The main output of the project will be the model, witch makes possible the simulation of influence of changes in construction of tax and benefit system to labour market and make the ex-antee evaluation of the government policy in this field. tax system; social benefits; low earner groups; poverty trap; labour market; social inclusion	The Influence of Interaction between Tax and Benefit System to Low Earner Groups The goal of this project is trough the coefficients of effectiveness tax rates (marginal and average) to describe real impacts of the interaction between tax and benefit system to particular types of households and influence to unemployment of low earnergroups and indirectly to their availability of social inclusion. The main output of the project will be the model, witch makes possible the simulation of influence of changes in construction of tax and benefit system to labour market and make the ex-antee evaluation of the government policy in this field. tax system; social benefits; low earner groups; poverty trap; labour market; social inclusion
Reproduction of social inequalities under conditions of equality policies The scientific research with a distinct application impact. The effects can be used for a flexible strategy of law, measures and particular norms implementation, which objective is to equalize chances for different groups of citizens. It will be theoretically anchored in the interactionalist approach to social inequalities. The core of the project is represented by three analyses of up-to-date processes, which are: 1. the integration of foreigners into the Czech Republic, 2. the attainment of factual men and women equality in a sphere of harmony between earning activity and child care, 3. the rebuilding of democratic ownership relations in a housing sphere. These three analyses are roofed and joined together with the theoretically orientated analysis of inequalities construction on the basis of utilitarian interpretations and applications of provisions, which are intended to open the society (equalize chances). It is going to be the first large research, which rises from interactionalism, and which is Social inequalities; Equality of men and women; Integration of foreigners; Rental entitlements to flats; Ownership entitlements to flats; Social construction of inequalities; Qualitative research; Generic processes	Reproduction of social inequalities under conditions of equality policies The scientific research with a distinct application impact. The effects can be used for a flexible strategy of law, measures and particular norms implementation, which objective is to equalize chances for different groups of citizens. It will be theoretically anchored in the interactionalist approach to social inequalities. The core of the project is represented by three analyses of up-to-date processes, which are: 1. the integration of foreigners into the Czech Republic, 2. the attainment of factual men and women equality in a sphere of harmony between earning activity and child care, 3. the rebuilding of democratic ownership relations in a housing sphere. These three analyses are roofed and joined together with the theoretically orientated analysis of inequalities construction on the basis of utilitarian interpretations and applications of provisions, which are intended to open the society (equalize chances). It is going to be the first large research, which rises from interactionalism, and which is Social inequalities; Equality of men and women; Integration of foreigners; Rental entitlements to flats; Ownership entitlements to flats; Social construction of inequalities; Qualitative research; Generic processes
Non-profit organizations in the sphere of social and healthcare services - economic efficiency and social aspects The work aims to objectify and rationalise problems of production and behaviour which non-profit organisations must face in working in the sphere of social and healthcare services. The basic theoretical bases include neo-classical theories, primary public economics theory, and work and empirical surveys of the non-profit sector (NS) abroad and in ČR in the relations of the state and non-state NS and as related to national economy. Methodology: research and related qualitative and quantitative analyses apply mix of social-economic methods. The impact of the development of legal framework on social and healthcare service actors is also part of the approach. Expected results include making more precise micro and macro-levels statistical indicators of themonitored non-profit org. (NO). Main emphasis put on looking for ways to optimise non-govt. NOs as alternatives to and complementing state organisations. Non-profit organisations; Healthcare and social services; Economic and political efficiency; Social-economic efficiency; Satellite accounts; Social and individual use; Volunteers; Natural transfers	Non-profit organizations in the sphere of social and healthcare services - economic efficiency and social aspects The work aims to objectify and rationalise problems of production and behaviour which non-profit organisations must face in working in the sphere of social and healthcare services. The basic theoretical bases include neo-classical theories, primary public economics theory, and work and empirical surveys of the non-profit sector (NS) abroad and in ČR in the relations of the state and non-state NS and as related to national economy. Methodology: research and related qualitative and quantitative analyses apply mix of social-economic methods. The impact of the development of legal framework on social and healthcare service actors is also part of the approach. Expected results include making more precise micro and macro-levels statistical indicators of themonitored non-profit org. (NO). Main emphasis put on looking for ways to optimise non-govt. NOs as alternatives to and complementing state organisations. Non-profit organisations; Healthcare and social services; Economic and political efficiency; Social-economic efficiency; Satellite accounts; Social and individual use; Volunteers; Natural transfers
Pedagogical models in subject didactics - potential use of Slovenian research in our/czech practical work - annotation. The purpose of joint research work is to ascertain the relation of students (studying at PdF MU to be 1st level reachers and studying at Faculty of Education MU Brno and BTF ULj in Slovenia to be 2nd level biology teachers) towards animals.On the groundof acquired results two pedagogical models (model of experiential learning about animals and model for reduction of prejudice towards animals), that werw constructed at the chair for the didactics of biology at the BTF ULj,will be incorporated in their subject. At the end of the course results of the application of both models will be carefully observed and noted. Within the same project frame, co-operation on the previously initiated researchRelation human: animal, with the target group of elementary school pupils, will also také place. The final aim of the project is the comparison of results in both countries and the potential application of both models biology didactics at PdF MU Brno The animals; models of pedagogical research; didactics of biology and nature science; international research in Slovenia and Czech Republic; comparation of results in both countries; application of both models at Masaryk University	Pedagogical models in subject didactics - potential use of Slovenian research in our/czech practical work - annotation. The purpose of joint research work is to ascertain the relation of students (studying at PdF MU to be 1st level reachers and studying at Faculty of Education MU Brno and BTF ULj in Slovenia to be 2nd level biology teachers) towards animals.On the groundof acquired results two pedagogical models (model of experiential learning about animals and model for reduction of prejudice towards animals), that werw constructed at the chair for the didactics of biology at the BTF ULj,will be incorporated in their subject. At the end of the course results of the application of both models will be carefully observed and noted. Within the same project frame, co-operation on the previously initiated researchRelation human: animal, with the target group of elementary school pupils, will also také place. The final aim of the project is the comparison of results in both countries and the potential application of both models biology didactics at PdF MU Brno The animals; models of pedagogical research; didactics of biology and nature science; international research in Slovenia and Czech Republic; comparation of results in both countries; application of both models at Masaryk University
Optimality conditions on time scales The focus of this project is the study of 2nd order optimality conditions in calculus of variations and optimal control problems on time scales. These conditions are based on the nonnegativity (i.e. necessary optimality conditions) and the positivity orcoercivity (i.e. sufficient optimality conditions) of the corresponding quadratic functionals of the second variation. In particular, we will study their characterizations in terms of conjugate and coupled points, and the solvability of the associated Jacobi and Riccati dynamic equations. Time scale; Quadratic functional; Variable endpoints; Conjugate and coupled point; Jacobi equation; Riccati equation; Nonnegativity; Positivity; Coercivity; Disconjugacy; Optimality conditions	Optimality conditions on time scales The focus of this project is the study of 2nd order optimality conditions in calculus of variations and optimal control problems on time scales. These conditions are based on the nonnegativity (i.e. necessary optimality conditions) and the positivity orcoercivity (i.e. sufficient optimality conditions) of the corresponding quadratic functionals of the second variation. In particular, we will study their characterizations in terms of conjugate and coupled points, and the solvability of the associated Jacobi and Riccati dynamic equations. Time scale; Quadratic functional; Variable endpoints; Conjugate and coupled point; Jacobi equation; Riccati equation; Nonnegativity; Positivity; Coercivity; Disconjugacy; Optimality conditions
Early medieval centre in Pohansko near Břeclav. Munitio, emporium or palatium of Lords of Moravia? The archaeological complex of Pohansko south of the town of Břeclav is one of the most important and thoroughly investigated early medieval centers in Central Europe. Built in the ninth century, Pohansko is a sprawling fortress in the southeast corner ofthe Czech Republic. Archaeological research at the site has been underway since 1958 and has uncovered a wealth of artifacts providing insight into early medieval society and culture. Pohansko is a model early medieval centre that occurred at the historical moment of the birth of a new social order and the creation of the first state-level political organizations. The aim of the project is the explanation of the archaeological structures in Pohansko and on this way the explanation of the important processes in the early medieval society. The archaeological research is supported by new IT technologies like GIS, GPS nad multivariate statistical analysis. archaeology; early medieval age; Pohansko	Early medieval centre in Pohansko near Břeclav. Munitio, emporium or palatium of Lords of Moravia? The archaeological complex of Pohansko south of the town of Břeclav is one of the most important and thoroughly investigated early medieval centers in Central Europe. Built in the ninth century, Pohansko is a sprawling fortress in the southeast corner ofthe Czech Republic. Archaeological research at the site has been underway since 1958 and has uncovered a wealth of artifacts providing insight into early medieval society and culture. Pohansko is a model early medieval centre that occurred at the historical moment of the birth of a new social order and the creation of the first state-level political organizations. The aim of the project is the explanation of the archaeological structures in Pohansko and on this way the explanation of the important processes in the early medieval society. The archaeological research is supported by new IT technologies like GIS, GPS nad multivariate statistical analysis. archaeology; early medieval age; Pohansko
Study of diversity bentic invertebrates of the litoral of the north part of the Adriatic Sea. Study of diversity of selected groups of bentic invertebrates of the litoral of the north part of the Adriatic Sea in view of utilization of results for teaching in the Faculty of Education of the Masaryk University in Brno diversity; communities; bentic invertebrates; marine litoral; Adriatic Sea	Study of diversity bentic invertebrates of the litoral of the north part of the Adriatic Sea. Study of diversity of selected groups of bentic invertebrates of the litoral of the north part of the Adriatic Sea in view of utilization of results for teaching in the Faculty of Education of the Masaryk University in Brno diversity; communities; bentic invertebrates; marine litoral; Adriatic Sea
Cellular and molecular methods for assessment of endocrine disruption The project supports the stay of Czech scientist in the USA with the aims to obtain new experiences with molecular biological techniques in ecotoxicology, to study endocrine disruption mechanisms, to bring the knowledge and support research in CR endocrine disruption; steroidogenesis; POPs; contaminant; molecular beacon; RT-PCR; in vitro	Cellular and molecular methods for assessment of endocrine disruption The project supports the stay of Czech scientist in the USA with the aims to obtain new experiences with molecular biological techniques in ecotoxicology, to study endocrine disruption mechanisms, to bring the knowledge and support research in CR endocrine disruption; steroidogenesis; POPs; contaminant; molecular beacon; RT-PCR; in vitro
Experimental modelling of flow in biomechanics of man This project deals with the experimental investigation of the blood flow in the blood vessels and the urinary flow in the urinary tract using an acoustic methods provided by Ultrasound Velocity Profilometer measuring apparatus.The very first aim is to construct a complete measuring apparatus and then to develop a methodical approach of measurement. Physical models representing the inner organs should be prepared.The investigation concerns above all the cardiovascular system and lower urinary passages, mainly the urethra and urinary bladder. Main quantities describing the properties of the flow in human body should be determined.Large set of significantly important data should be meausred, treated and discussed as well. Thus, the study would enrich present knowledge of the flow and fluid-structure interaction in the human body. biomechanics; flow of blood; urine flow; experimental measurement; ultrasond apparatus	Experimental modelling of flow in biomechanics of man This project deals with the experimental investigation of the blood flow in the blood vessels and the urinary flow in the urinary tract using an acoustic methods provided by Ultrasound Velocity Profilometer measuring apparatus.The very first aim is to construct a complete measuring apparatus and then to develop a methodical approach of measurement. Physical models representing the inner organs should be prepared.The investigation concerns above all the cardiovascular system and lower urinary passages, mainly the urethra and urinary bladder. Main quantities describing the properties of the flow in human body should be determined.Large set of significantly important data should be meausred, treated and discussed as well. Thus, the study would enrich present knowledge of the flow and fluid-structure interaction in the human body. biomechanics; flow of blood; urine flow; experimental measurement; ultrasond apparatus
Ultrasonic vision system for robotic applications The project is focused on a six month research stay of the key person -Roman Cermak- at the Faculty of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada. The stay is planned for a period from 2004/04/01to 2004/09/30The research will be focused on development of the new ultrasonic sensor for robotic applications. It will be carried out in following areas : (1) development of mathematical model of the sensor - analytical and numerical (based on e.g.the finite element method), (2) experimental verification of mathematical models, (3) identification of the relation between transient vibration of a membrane and the obstacle position, (4) redesign of the ultrasonic sensor and prototypes development,(5) modelling of innovated sensors and experimental verification of models, (6) optimisation of the sensor parameters. ultrasonic sensor; robot; vision system	Ultrasonic vision system for robotic applications The project is focused on a six month research stay of the key person -Roman Cermak- at the Faculty of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada. The stay is planned for a period from 2004/04/01to 2004/09/30The research will be focused on development of the new ultrasonic sensor for robotic applications. It will be carried out in following areas : (1) development of mathematical model of the sensor - analytical and numerical (based on e.g.the finite element method), (2) experimental verification of mathematical models, (3) identification of the relation between transient vibration of a membrane and the obstacle position, (4) redesign of the ultrasonic sensor and prototypes development,(5) modelling of innovated sensors and experimental verification of models, (6) optimisation of the sensor parameters. ultrasonic sensor; robot; vision system
Structure characterization of g-RNA from Trypanosoma brucei In this grant application we propose structural studies of g-RNA molecules that plays essential role in pre-mRNA editing in Kinetoplastida.UV, CD and NMR spectroscopy will be used to charakterize secondary and terciary structures of several g-RNAs from Trypanosoma brucei. Specific aim of this project is to find a conserved structural motive common to all g-RNAs, which is expected to be responsible for recruitment of g-RNA into editing process.The overall objective of this work is to provide a molecularbasis for understanding g-RNA function in editing process and provide a rational basis for design of drugs to selectivelly inhibit editing process in predominantly parazitic Kinetoplastidas. Trypanosoma brucei; Kinetoplastida; g-RNA; RNA editing; circular dichroism; UV; NMR spektroscopy; structure	Structure characterization of g-RNA from Trypanosoma brucei In this grant application we propose structural studies of g-RNA molecules that plays essential role in pre-mRNA editing in Kinetoplastida.UV, CD and NMR spectroscopy will be used to charakterize secondary and terciary structures of several g-RNAs from Trypanosoma brucei. Specific aim of this project is to find a conserved structural motive common to all g-RNAs, which is expected to be responsible for recruitment of g-RNA into editing process.The overall objective of this work is to provide a molecularbasis for understanding g-RNA function in editing process and provide a rational basis for design of drugs to selectivelly inhibit editing process in predominantly parazitic Kinetoplastidas. Trypanosoma brucei; Kinetoplastida; g-RNA; RNA editing; circular dichroism; UV; NMR spektroscopy; structure
Introduction of DNA microarray methodology and its application in antitumor therapy Malignant cell transformation is characterized by disruption of cell cycle regulation and apoptosis related genes. Exact understanding of these mechanisms is a prerequisite for molecular characterisation of tumors, prediction of therapeutical response and also for potential gene therapy. DNA microarray technology was established for determination of mRNA expression of thousands of genes simultaneously. This methodology helps to define differences between normal and tumor cells and reveal possible primary causes of malignant transformation or monitor the molecular changes during anticancer therapy. Key differentially expressed genes in tumor cells will be defined within this project and their expression will be influenced through the transfection of specific siRNA (small interfering RNA).This post-transcriptional silencing using of the gene expression using RNA interference will be detected both on RNA and protein level and will constitute a potential instrument for antitumor therapy. microarrays; DNA; RNA; apoptosis; tumor; therapy; siRNA	Introduction of DNA microarray methodology and its application in antitumor therapy Malignant cell transformation is characterized by disruption of cell cycle regulation and apoptosis related genes. Exact understanding of these mechanisms is a prerequisite for molecular characterisation of tumors, prediction of therapeutical response and also for potential gene therapy. DNA microarray technology was established for determination of mRNA expression of thousands of genes simultaneously. This methodology helps to define differences between normal and tumor cells and reveal possible primary causes of malignant transformation or monitor the molecular changes during anticancer therapy. Key differentially expressed genes in tumor cells will be defined within this project and their expression will be influenced through the transfection of specific siRNA (small interfering RNA).This post-transcriptional silencing using of the gene expression using RNA interference will be detected both on RNA and protein level and will constitute a potential instrument for antitumor therapy. microarrays; DNA; RNA; apoptosis; tumor; therapy; siRNA
Dynamic semi- and non-parametric models with applications in finance The project further develops existing research. The main aim is to investigate the asymptotic properties of non- and semi-parametric estimators of regression curves under nonstandard constraints with emphasis on applications in financial modelling. We will concentrate primarily on the estimation of the state price density (SPD) which describes the state of the market and allows pricing of exotic options. Application of the methods of functional factor analysis will allow lowerdimensional representationof the estimates and study of the dynamic development of these factors in dependence on time. Another goal of the project is the application of Changepoint Analysis and Stochastic Process Control on density estimates and application of these new methodson the dynamically estimated SPDs. constrained nonparametric regression; confidence regions; state price density; functional factor analysis; changepoint; stochastic process control	Dynamic semi- and non-parametric models with applications in finance The project further develops existing research. The main aim is to investigate the asymptotic properties of non- and semi-parametric estimators of regression curves under nonstandard constraints with emphasis on applications in financial modelling. We will concentrate primarily on the estimation of the state price density (SPD) which describes the state of the market and allows pricing of exotic options. Application of the methods of functional factor analysis will allow lowerdimensional representationof the estimates and study of the dynamic development of these factors in dependence on time. Another goal of the project is the application of Changepoint Analysis and Stochastic Process Control on density estimates and application of these new methodson the dynamically estimated SPDs. constrained nonparametric regression; confidence regions; state price density; functional factor analysis; changepoint; stochastic process control
Functional Characterization of Bacterial Proton-Dependent Manganese Transporters (MntH) using Fluorescence Methods Since the Nramp family of divalent metal ion transporters contributes to host resistance, it appears that functional bacterial homologs of Nramp (MntH) inherited by horizontal gene transfer may be important for pathogenesis. The proposed project aims atfurther development and optimisation of sensitive fluorescence techniques allowing to study the transport by proton-dependent manganese transporters (MntH) in living bacteria. We will study the changes of intracellular concentration of proton and of metal substrate resulting from MntH-dependent transport using pH-sensitive ratiometric Green Fluorescent Protein and a metal sensitive fluorescent probe, respectively. These fluorescence assays will be used to investigate the potential binding sites in bacterial MntH transporters, to probe the possible evolution of Nramp family and to challenge functional differences between phylogenetic groups of MntH. ratiometric GFP; intracellular pH; bacteria; divalent metal ion; MntH transporter; Nramp transporter; fluorescent probe; secondary metal transporter; E. coli	Functional Characterization of Bacterial Proton-Dependent Manganese Transporters (MntH) using Fluorescence Methods Since the Nramp family of divalent metal ion transporters contributes to host resistance, it appears that functional bacterial homologs of Nramp (MntH) inherited by horizontal gene transfer may be important for pathogenesis. The proposed project aims atfurther development and optimisation of sensitive fluorescence techniques allowing to study the transport by proton-dependent manganese transporters (MntH) in living bacteria. We will study the changes of intracellular concentration of proton and of metal substrate resulting from MntH-dependent transport using pH-sensitive ratiometric Green Fluorescent Protein and a metal sensitive fluorescent probe, respectively. These fluorescence assays will be used to investigate the potential binding sites in bacterial MntH transporters, to probe the possible evolution of Nramp family and to challenge functional differences between phylogenetic groups of MntH. ratiometric GFP; intracellular pH; bacteria; divalent metal ion; MntH transporter; Nramp transporter; fluorescent probe; secondary metal transporter; E. coli
Apoptosis as a morphogenetic process in tooth development Reciprocal cell-cell inteactions form tooth germs during mammalian embryonal development. Cell proliferation, death, migration and adhesion and their interplay are essential for correct odontogenesis.Temporospatial distribution of apoptotic cells duringtooth development suggests several possible roles of this morphogenetic process in tooth shape and size determination and patterning.Interference and modulations of signalling pathways and molecules are necessary to achieve functional information concerning the roles and molecular mechanisms of apoptosis in tooth development. The project aims to apply techniques of explant culturein studies of dental apoptosis. The outcome will bring new methodical approaches and original date to basic and biomedical research, with application in molecular dentistry and also education. apoptosis; odontogenesis; cell signalling; explant cultures	Apoptosis as a morphogenetic process in tooth development Reciprocal cell-cell inteactions form tooth germs during mammalian embryonal development. Cell proliferation, death, migration and adhesion and their interplay are essential for correct odontogenesis.Temporospatial distribution of apoptotic cells duringtooth development suggests several possible roles of this morphogenetic process in tooth shape and size determination and patterning.Interference and modulations of signalling pathways and molecules are necessary to achieve functional information concerning the roles and molecular mechanisms of apoptosis in tooth development. The project aims to apply techniques of explant culturein studies of dental apoptosis. The outcome will bring new methodical approaches and original date to basic and biomedical research, with application in molecular dentistry and also education. apoptosis; odontogenesis; cell signalling; explant cultures
Man - machine interaction The Project is aimed at man-machine interaction problems, especially driver-car in transportation issuesThe Project tasks are related to many scientific areas. The main are medicine, electro-engineering, mathematical analysis and informatics; simulationequipment creating (car and virtual reality scene); driver behavior observation and biological parameters measuring; analyzes of video data, electroencephalogram, electrooculogram, electrocardiogram, etc.; warning system creating (level of attention, micro sleep, etc.) Man - machine interaction; neuroinformastics; operator behavior; road safety; microsleeps detection	Man - machine interaction The Project is aimed at man-machine interaction problems, especially driver-car in transportation issuesThe Project tasks are related to many scientific areas. The main are medicine, electro-engineering, mathematical analysis and informatics; simulationequipment creating (car and virtual reality scene); driver behavior observation and biological parameters measuring; analyzes of video data, electroencephalogram, electrooculogram, electrocardiogram, etc.; warning system creating (level of attention, micro sleep, etc.) Man - machine interaction; neuroinformastics; operator behavior; road safety; microsleeps detection
Reactive oxygen species in photosynthesis Production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) will be studied on the different structural levels of photosynthetic apparatus under conditions of high temperature and high irradiation. The effect of partial or complete inhibition of Calvin cycle on production of ROS will be studied in the isolated chloroplast. The production of ROS in the thylakoid membranes will be studied to determine the involvement of the component of thylakoid membrane in oxidative processes connected to the light reactions of photosynthesis. Isolated photosystem II membranes will be used as a model systems to qualify and quantify ROS produced by photosystem II complexes. photosynthesis; chloroplast; thylakoid membrane; photosystem; reactive oxygen species; superoxide; hydroxyl radical; singlet oxygen; hydrogen peroxide; electron paramagnetic resonance; spin trapping; heat stress; photoinhibition	Reactive oxygen species in photosynthesis Production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) will be studied on the different structural levels of photosynthetic apparatus under conditions of high temperature and high irradiation. The effect of partial or complete inhibition of Calvin cycle on production of ROS will be studied in the isolated chloroplast. The production of ROS in the thylakoid membranes will be studied to determine the involvement of the component of thylakoid membrane in oxidative processes connected to the light reactions of photosynthesis. Isolated photosystem II membranes will be used as a model systems to qualify and quantify ROS produced by photosystem II complexes. photosynthesis; chloroplast; thylakoid membrane; photosystem; reactive oxygen species; superoxide; hydroxyl radical; singlet oxygen; hydrogen peroxide; electron paramagnetic resonance; spin trapping; heat stress; photoinhibition
UP-Drábek: Typing of degraded DNA of Sambucus nigra and Vitis vinifera using molecular genetics methods Cultivars (and species) of Vitis genus propagate vegetatively and can be, therefore, genotyped; the most frequent genotyping method is microsatellite (STR) typing. This project aims to detect wine adulteration using molecular genetics methods. DNA is degraded and largely removed during wine-making process. That is why genotyping attempts were so far unsuccessful. The goal of this project is to detect DNA of wine-making Vitis vinifera cultivars and wine-colouring elderberry (Sambucus nigra) in wine. We want to use steps of a) DNA co-precipitation with linear polyacrylamide, b) enzymatic reparation, and c) TempliPhi genomic amplification to improve the efficiency of STR typing from wine. genotyping; authentication; grapevine; variety; cultivar; microsatellite; Vitis; Sambucus; and wine	UP-Drábek: Typing of degraded DNA of Sambucus nigra and Vitis vinifera using molecular genetics methods Cultivars (and species) of Vitis genus propagate vegetatively and can be, therefore, genotyped; the most frequent genotyping method is microsatellite (STR) typing. This project aims to detect wine adulteration using molecular genetics methods. DNA is degraded and largely removed during wine-making process. That is why genotyping attempts were so far unsuccessful. The goal of this project is to detect DNA of wine-making Vitis vinifera cultivars and wine-colouring elderberry (Sambucus nigra) in wine. We want to use steps of a) DNA co-precipitation with linear polyacrylamide, b) enzymatic reparation, and c) TempliPhi genomic amplification to improve the efficiency of STR typing from wine. genotyping; authentication; grapevine; variety; cultivar; microsatellite; Vitis; Sambucus; and wine
New oxidation catalysts based on amphiphilic flavins The aim of the project is preparation of nanoaggregates (micelles or microemulsions) containing amphiphilic flavins and use of the prepared nanoaggregates for catalysis of aerobic oxidation of organic substrates. Solubilization of flavin and the substrate in nanoaggregates allows contact of both reagents due to non-covalent interactions. Increased rate of oxidations can thus be expected in the comparison with reactions in homogeneous solutions. We will focus on aerobic oxidation of organic sulfides catalyzed by flavinium salts as well as aerobic photo oxidation of alcohols sensitized by flavins. In the presence of chiral element in the catalyst, asymmetric induction should be observed. Prepared catalytic systems represent models of flavin monooxygenases as well as non-toxic oxidizing agents, which can be applied in the field of green technologies. flavin; photooxidation; oxidation; nanoaggregates; asymmetric catalysis; sulfides; alcohols; electron transfer	New oxidation catalysts based on amphiphilic flavins The aim of the project is preparation of nanoaggregates (micelles or microemulsions) containing amphiphilic flavins and use of the prepared nanoaggregates for catalysis of aerobic oxidation of organic substrates. Solubilization of flavin and the substrate in nanoaggregates allows contact of both reagents due to non-covalent interactions. Increased rate of oxidations can thus be expected in the comparison with reactions in homogeneous solutions. We will focus on aerobic oxidation of organic sulfides catalyzed by flavinium salts as well as aerobic photo oxidation of alcohols sensitized by flavins. In the presence of chiral element in the catalyst, asymmetric induction should be observed. Prepared catalytic systems represent models of flavin monooxygenases as well as non-toxic oxidizing agents, which can be applied in the field of green technologies. flavin; photooxidation; oxidation; nanoaggregates; asymmetric catalysis; sulfides; alcohols; electron transfer
Reputation-based Security of Information Systems The proposed project is focused on security of distributed information systems. When certain level of users' anonymity is required security mechanisms must by based on different source of data. Trust or reputation becomes crucial information security ofinformation systems. This approach based on experience inevitable implies number of problems that become subjects of this project: possibility of attacks exploiting faked identities, effective reactions to attacks, use of indirect evidence (e.g. recommendations) in IS, search for interesting patterns in stored evidence. The problems named are profound for the whole research area covering decenterlized distributed information systems. trust; reputation; distributed system; evidence; Sybil attack; anonymity; risk; assessment; analysis; access control; security mechanisms; privacy	Reputation-based Security of Information Systems The proposed project is focused on security of distributed information systems. When certain level of users' anonymity is required security mechanisms must by based on different source of data. Trust or reputation becomes crucial information security ofinformation systems. This approach based on experience inevitable implies number of problems that become subjects of this project: possibility of attacks exploiting faked identities, effective reactions to attacks, use of indirect evidence (e.g. recommendations) in IS, search for interesting patterns in stored evidence. The problems named are profound for the whole research area covering decenterlized distributed information systems. trust; reputation; distributed system; evidence; Sybil attack; anonymity; risk; assessment; analysis; access control; security mechanisms; privacy
Self-writen channel waveguides The subject of the proposed project is theoretical and experimental study of two and three dimensional self-written waveguides. As the photosensitive medium will serve Germanium-doped silica glasses. For two-dimensional structures will be prepared planarwaveguides on the surface of the glass by ion-exchange. The self-writing will be realized using two-photon absorption from an Argon-ion laser. Special effort will be dedicated to find conditions under which the channel waveguides are single-moded. We will also study influence of polarization of the Argon laser on birefringence of the self-written waveguides. integrated optics; photosensitity; self-writing; single-mode waveguides; birefringence	Self-writen channel waveguides The subject of the proposed project is theoretical and experimental study of two and three dimensional self-written waveguides. As the photosensitive medium will serve Germanium-doped silica glasses. For two-dimensional structures will be prepared planarwaveguides on the surface of the glass by ion-exchange. The self-writing will be realized using two-photon absorption from an Argon-ion laser. Special effort will be dedicated to find conditions under which the channel waveguides are single-moded. We will also study influence of polarization of the Argon laser on birefringence of the self-written waveguides. integrated optics; photosensitity; self-writing; single-mode waveguides; birefringence
Research and implementation of methods of efficient database propositionalization Design of efficient methods of propositionalization, that is, conversion of structured data into a simplified single-relational flat representation, with a minimum loss of user-important information, for the purpose of enabling the analysis, modeling andother kinds of processing of structured data by means of existing sophisticated software systems, typically constrained to processing flat single-relational data. Implementation of selected designed methods in the form of a component of the existing software system SumatraSuite for general data transformations. Databases; Data Transformation; Propositionalization; Feature Construction; Inductive Logic Programming	Research and implementation of methods of efficient database propositionalization Design of efficient methods of propositionalization, that is, conversion of structured data into a simplified single-relational flat representation, with a minimum loss of user-important information, for the purpose of enabling the analysis, modeling andother kinds of processing of structured data by means of existing sophisticated software systems, typically constrained to processing flat single-relational data. Implementation of selected designed methods in the form of a component of the existing software system SumatraSuite for general data transformations. Databases; Data Transformation; Propositionalization; Feature Construction; Inductive Logic Programming
Statistical aspects of size effect influence on reliability of concrete structures Reliability of concrete structures is often influenced by size effect. This phenomena exists in both real structures and experimental specimens. Modeling of statistical size effect by extreme value theory and random fields is the main target of project.A necessary partial task is the development of methods needed for simulation stochastic fields, vector processesand utilization of stability postulate for extreme value theory. Alternative methods for real load modes will be developed. Described tools ofmathematical statistics will be used for response solution of real structures in a high degree of complexity. Nonlinear fracture mechanics will be enriched by consideration of uncertainty and spatial variability of parameters. Computational tools will enable study of complex phenomena, which often significantly influence behavior and safety of monumental engineering structures. An emphasize will be given to practical aspects and to answers of fundamental questions. Size effect; random variables; random fields; Weibull theory; structural strength; concrete; extreme values statistics; reliability; Monte Carlo simulation	Statistical aspects of size effect influence on reliability of concrete structures Reliability of concrete structures is often influenced by size effect. This phenomena exists in both real structures and experimental specimens. Modeling of statistical size effect by extreme value theory and random fields is the main target of project.A necessary partial task is the development of methods needed for simulation stochastic fields, vector processesand utilization of stability postulate for extreme value theory. Alternative methods for real load modes will be developed. Described tools ofmathematical statistics will be used for response solution of real structures in a high degree of complexity. Nonlinear fracture mechanics will be enriched by consideration of uncertainty and spatial variability of parameters. Computational tools will enable study of complex phenomena, which often significantly influence behavior and safety of monumental engineering structures. An emphasize will be given to practical aspects and to answers of fundamental questions. Size effect; random variables; random fields; Weibull theory; structural strength; concrete; extreme values statistics; reliability; Monte Carlo simulation
Damage mechanism of structural brittle matrix composites loaded with high temperatures Project is focused on complex investigation of damage mechanism of structural brittle matrix composites under high temperature conditions (fire, containers for nuclear waste) with using of experimental techniques and numerical simulations. Damage of structures when loaded with high temperatures on macro level is conditioned by physical and chemical changes in material. Experiments are designed with a high complexity to qualify an influence of micro and meso changes on material damage. Application for numerical simulation of temperature field in material and constitutive relations for mechanical/physical properties in dependence on temperature will be provided. It will serve as a procedure for nonlinear solvers of quasibrittle damage. Complex research on damage mechanism of concrete structures loaded with high temperatures with using of experimental and simulation techniques is essential for development of resistant materials and criterion for safe and economical design of structures. High temperature; damage mechanism; quasibrittle material; cement-based composite; experimental technique; numerical simulation	Damage mechanism of structural brittle matrix composites loaded with high temperatures Project is focused on complex investigation of damage mechanism of structural brittle matrix composites under high temperature conditions (fire, containers for nuclear waste) with using of experimental techniques and numerical simulations. Damage of structures when loaded with high temperatures on macro level is conditioned by physical and chemical changes in material. Experiments are designed with a high complexity to qualify an influence of micro and meso changes on material damage. Application for numerical simulation of temperature field in material and constitutive relations for mechanical/physical properties in dependence on temperature will be provided. It will serve as a procedure for nonlinear solvers of quasibrittle damage. Complex research on damage mechanism of concrete structures loaded with high temperatures with using of experimental and simulation techniques is essential for development of resistant materials and criterion for safe and economical design of structures. High temperature; damage mechanism; quasibrittle material; cement-based composite; experimental technique; numerical simulation
Modification of histones in chromatin regions with increased and reduced expression The variety of histone modifications (histone code) is believed to mark expression or silencing of genes. Clustering of active or silent genes in regions with increased expression (Ridges)or anti-Ridges provides excellent possibility to check the histone-code hypothesis. The most important in this context are H3K9 and H3K4 positions where mono-, di-, tri-methylation and acetylationwill be studied using antibodies in human fibroblasts and lymphocytes. DNA probes for one Ridge and one anti-Ridge of one ofhuman chromosomes will be used. Colocalization of DNA probeswith antibodies to modified histones will be investigated. Nuclear and territorial topography of the mentioned loci will be determined. modifications of histones; histone code; Ridges and anti-Ridges; methylation; acetylation; antibodies; FISH	Modification of histones in chromatin regions with increased and reduced expression The variety of histone modifications (histone code) is believed to mark expression or silencing of genes. Clustering of active or silent genes in regions with increased expression (Ridges)or anti-Ridges provides excellent possibility to check the histone-code hypothesis. The most important in this context are H3K9 and H3K4 positions where mono-, di-, tri-methylation and acetylationwill be studied using antibodies in human fibroblasts and lymphocytes. DNA probes for one Ridge and one anti-Ridge of one ofhuman chromosomes will be used. Colocalization of DNA probeswith antibodies to modified histones will be investigated. Nuclear and territorial topography of the mentioned loci will be determined. modifications of histones; histone code; Ridges and anti-Ridges; methylation; acetylation; antibodies; FISH
Analysis of the energetic effects on the film growth and microstructure The aim of the project is a support of the research stay of young scientist of the Department of Physics, Faculty of Education, Purkyne University in Usti nad Labem. The stay will be at Ecole Polytechnique in Montreal, Canada. Duration of the stay willbe6 months. Project leader in Canada is an expert in the field of PECVD of thin films, plasma treatment of surfaces, surface analysis and novel thin film technology. Research will be aimed to growth, structure and microstructure of thin films for opticsand photonics. Computational physics methods will be used for the research as well as necessary experimental data. Results will be published on at least one international conference and/or in international journal. thin films; surface analysis; structure; microstructure; computational physics	Analysis of the energetic effects on the film growth and microstructure The aim of the project is a support of the research stay of young scientist of the Department of Physics, Faculty of Education, Purkyne University in Usti nad Labem. The stay will be at Ecole Polytechnique in Montreal, Canada. Duration of the stay willbe6 months. Project leader in Canada is an expert in the field of PECVD of thin films, plasma treatment of surfaces, surface analysis and novel thin film technology. Research will be aimed to growth, structure and microstructure of thin films for opticsand photonics. Computational physics methods will be used for the research as well as necessary experimental data. Results will be published on at least one international conference and/or in international journal. thin films; surface analysis; structure; microstructure; computational physics
Distributed end-user services for new generations of mobile networks The aim of the project is to provide necessary technical and personal background for the research activities of the key personnel to let him continue with his scientific and research activities begun through his fellowship at BUTE. During his fellowshipthe key personnel focused on the implementation of the peer-to-peer technology for new end-user services of mobile networks, which represents a very perspective trend in network service provision. After his return from the fellowship a research team wasfounded from the collegues of the key personnel and Ph.D. students of FEEC BUT, who are very interested in continuing in this field The required financial support will be used to adopt the recent equipment of the laboratory of mobile network technologiesto activities planned in the project and to finance the research team members solving this project. mobile networks; peer-to-peer; end-user services	Distributed end-user services for new generations of mobile networks The aim of the project is to provide necessary technical and personal background for the research activities of the key personnel to let him continue with his scientific and research activities begun through his fellowship at BUTE. During his fellowshipthe key personnel focused on the implementation of the peer-to-peer technology for new end-user services of mobile networks, which represents a very perspective trend in network service provision. After his return from the fellowship a research team wasfounded from the collegues of the key personnel and Ph.D. students of FEEC BUT, who are very interested in continuing in this field The required financial support will be used to adopt the recent equipment of the laboratory of mobile network technologiesto activities planned in the project and to finance the research team members solving this project. mobile networks; peer-to-peer; end-user services
Interactions of mutant p53 with genomic DNA in vitro and in vivo The tumor suppressor gene p53 belongs to the most frequently mutated genes in human cancer. This proposal is focused on elucidation of the impacts of specific mutp53 DNA binding activity in its "gain of function" effect. Binding of selected mutp53 to various DNA sequences and structures, inclusing elements involved in genomic stability and control of transcription or replication will be characterized in vitro and in vivo. Several methodic approaches will be utilized: techniques for the detection of DNA-protein interactions, computer analysis of DNA structure, chemical and enzymatic probes, electrochemical analysis of DNA and proteins and techniques for the detection of gene expression. It is further proposed to utilize modulation of p53 expression in cell lines by siRNA and anti-cancer drugs. It is expected that results of this study will be applicable in development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. tumor suppressor protein p53; mutant p53; protein conformation; posttranslational modifications; DNA-protein interactions; DNA structure; supercoiled DNA; control of gene expression; cancer	Interactions of mutant p53 with genomic DNA in vitro and in vivo The tumor suppressor gene p53 belongs to the most frequently mutated genes in human cancer. This proposal is focused on elucidation of the impacts of specific mutp53 DNA binding activity in its "gain of function" effect. Binding of selected mutp53 to various DNA sequences and structures, inclusing elements involved in genomic stability and control of transcription or replication will be characterized in vitro and in vivo. Several methodic approaches will be utilized: techniques for the detection of DNA-protein interactions, computer analysis of DNA structure, chemical and enzymatic probes, electrochemical analysis of DNA and proteins and techniques for the detection of gene expression. It is further proposed to utilize modulation of p53 expression in cell lines by siRNA and anti-cancer drugs. It is expected that results of this study will be applicable in development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. tumor suppressor protein p53; mutant p53; protein conformation; posttranslational modifications; DNA-protein interactions; DNA structure; supercoiled DNA; control of gene expression; cancer
Speciation studies of the radiohygienically significant radionuclides using TRLFS The project aims at a study of the abundance of chemical species (speciation) of radionuclides in solutions relevant for the nuclear fuel cycle. The first goal is a study of speciation of actinides in solutions simulating High Active Liquid Waste issuingthe reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel and the forms of their complexation with prospective extractants. This study should yield data important for the treatment of this waste by Partitioning & Transmutation technology. In model experiments, speciationofeuropium, americium or curium will be studied. Another aim of the project is a study of speciation of selected radionuclides in solutions simulating some liquid radioactive wastes issuing the operation of nuclear power plants ? decontaminationsolutionsand evaporator concentrates. The results of this basic research will be applicable for the development of new efficient separation methods. The knowledge gained will be, among others, used in university curricula innovation. speciation; TRLIFS; time resolved laser fluorescence spectroscopy; americium; europium; actinides; partitioning; transmutation; high level liquid waste; decontamination solution; evaporator concentrate	Speciation studies of the radiohygienically significant radionuclides using TRLFS The project aims at a study of the abundance of chemical species (speciation) of radionuclides in solutions relevant for the nuclear fuel cycle. The first goal is a study of speciation of actinides in solutions simulating High Active Liquid Waste issuingthe reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel and the forms of their complexation with prospective extractants. This study should yield data important for the treatment of this waste by Partitioning & Transmutation technology. In model experiments, speciationofeuropium, americium or curium will be studied. Another aim of the project is a study of speciation of selected radionuclides in solutions simulating some liquid radioactive wastes issuing the operation of nuclear power plants ? decontaminationsolutionsand evaporator concentrates. The results of this basic research will be applicable for the development of new efficient separation methods. The knowledge gained will be, among others, used in university curricula innovation. speciation; TRLIFS; time resolved laser fluorescence spectroscopy; americium; europium; actinides; partitioning; transmutation; high level liquid waste; decontamination solution; evaporator concentrate
Quantitative remote sensing of Norway spruce crowns under multiple stress influence The response of Norway spruce trees to changing environmental factors or stress impacts involves both short-term physiological responses and long-term physiological, structural, and morphological modifications. In respect to this, the proposed study is aiming to explore the capabilities and propose a method for using imaging spectroscopy of high spatial resolution for the estimation of crown biochemical and biophysical parameters. Crown status assessment of spruce trees will be done based on the retrieved quantitative parameters. Particular objectives are: A) Establish a sufficiently precise method for overall chlorophyll (Cha+b) content estimation from the high spatial resolution hyperspectral data of Norway spruce crowns, B) Find a suitable approachfor the spruce crown architectural information retrieval, as a potential marker of crown transformation rate. Specifically two biophysical characteristics, LAI (or foliage density) and foliage clumping index will be exploited. quantitative remote sensing; Norway spruce; retrieval; chlorophyll concentration; LAI; foliage clumping index; multiple stress; radiative transfer modelling	Quantitative remote sensing of Norway spruce crowns under multiple stress influence The response of Norway spruce trees to changing environmental factors or stress impacts involves both short-term physiological responses and long-term physiological, structural, and morphological modifications. In respect to this, the proposed study is aiming to explore the capabilities and propose a method for using imaging spectroscopy of high spatial resolution for the estimation of crown biochemical and biophysical parameters. Crown status assessment of spruce trees will be done based on the retrieved quantitative parameters. Particular objectives are: A) Establish a sufficiently precise method for overall chlorophyll (Cha+b) content estimation from the high spatial resolution hyperspectral data of Norway spruce crowns, B) Find a suitable approachfor the spruce crown architectural information retrieval, as a potential marker of crown transformation rate. Specifically two biophysical characteristics, LAI (or foliage density) and foliage clumping index will be exploited. quantitative remote sensing; Norway spruce; retrieval; chlorophyll concentration; LAI; foliage clumping index; multiple stress; radiative transfer modelling
Methods of molecular biology applied to the experimental pharmacology of respiratory system The aim of this proyect is to learn the methods of molecular biology (ELISA, RT-PCR, Western - blot, EMSA, Northern blot) applied to the experimental pharmacology of respiratory system and their introducing at the Faculty of Pharmacy of Charles University after return. molekulární biologie; ELISA; RT-PCR; Western - blot; EMSA; Northern blot; experimentální farmakologie; respirační systém	Methods of molecular biology applied to the experimental pharmacology of respiratory system The aim of this proyect is to learn the methods of molecular biology (ELISA, RT-PCR, Western - blot, EMSA, Northern blot) applied to the experimental pharmacology of respiratory system and their introducing at the Faculty of Pharmacy of Charles University after return. molekulární biologie; ELISA; RT-PCR; Western - blot; EMSA; Northern blot; experimentální farmakologie; respirační systém
Conductivity structure in the litosphere and the Earth's mantle inferred from the satellite geomagnetic data The research project proposes the studies of the electrical conductivity distribution in the litosphere ad the Earth's mantle by means of the electromagnetic induction and using data from low-altitude satellites CHAMP and Oersted. It concentrates on three partial, mutually related topics: further development of solutions of the forward EM induction problem in reallistic configuration of the Earth and its close surroundings, satellite data processing, and the inversion of the data. elektrická vodivost v Zemi; elektromagnetická (geomagnetická) indukce; geomagnetická satelitní měření	Conductivity structure in the litosphere and the Earth's mantle inferred from the satellite geomagnetic data The research project proposes the studies of the electrical conductivity distribution in the litosphere ad the Earth's mantle by means of the electromagnetic induction and using data from low-altitude satellites CHAMP and Oersted. It concentrates on three partial, mutually related topics: further development of solutions of the forward EM induction problem in reallistic configuration of the Earth and its close surroundings, satellite data processing, and the inversion of the data. elektrická vodivost v Zemi; elektromagnetická (geomagnetická) indukce; geomagnetická satelitní měření
Qualitative Properties of Solutions to Fluid Mechanics Systems. We propose to study qualitative properties of solutions to systems of PDE's coming from fluid mechanics. We focus on systems describing a flow of a viscous incompressible fluid. Specific material properties of the fluid are given by stress tensor S depending only on the symmetric part of the gradient of the fluid velocity and temperature. We will assume that for a given A from [0,1], C1>=C0>0, p1 >= p0>1 we have (1) C0(A + |G|)^(p0-2)|H|^2 < ( DS(G,.)H , H ) < C1(A + |G|)^(p1-2)|H|^2 for all symmetric matrices G, H. In the case of an isothermal process we will study the dependence of properties of the solutions on the parametres A, p0, p1 from (1). Our main interest is the existence, boundedness and continuity of derivatives of the vector field or thefull regularity of the weak solution to the system in question. We extend the model stated above also for processes which are not isothermal. For the new system we will study analogous questions as for the original system in order to compar vnitřní a hraniční regularita; silné řešení; zobecněné newtonovské tekutiny	Qualitative Properties of Solutions to Fluid Mechanics Systems. We propose to study qualitative properties of solutions to systems of PDE's coming from fluid mechanics. We focus on systems describing a flow of a viscous incompressible fluid. Specific material properties of the fluid are given by stress tensor S depending only on the symmetric part of the gradient of the fluid velocity and temperature. We will assume that for a given A from [0,1], C1>=C0>0, p1 >= p0>1 we have (1) C0(A + |G|)^(p0-2)|H|^2 < ( DS(G,.)H , H ) < C1(A + |G|)^(p1-2)|H|^2 for all symmetric matrices G, H. In the case of an isothermal process we will study the dependence of properties of the solutions on the parametres A, p0, p1 from (1). Our main interest is the existence, boundedness and continuity of derivatives of the vector field or thefull regularity of the weak solution to the system in question. We extend the model stated above also for processes which are not isothermal. For the new system we will study analogous questions as for the original system in order to compar vnitřní a hraniční regularita; silné řešení; zobecněné newtonovské tekutiny
The role of hybridization and polyploidization in Chenopodium album agg. During a stay at the Biology Department of the University of Leicester I would like to deal with hybridization and polyploidization within Chenopodium album agg. The main aim will be to learn a new technique called genomic in situ hybridization for analysis of polyploid ancestry of particular species within Chenopodium album agg. Chenopodium; genomická hybridizace in situ; polyploidizace; hybridizace	The role of hybridization and polyploidization in Chenopodium album agg. During a stay at the Biology Department of the University of Leicester I would like to deal with hybridization and polyploidization within Chenopodium album agg. The main aim will be to learn a new technique called genomic in situ hybridization for analysis of polyploid ancestry of particular species within Chenopodium album agg. Chenopodium; genomická hybridizace in situ; polyploidizace; hybridizace
Introduction of advanced methods of structural genomics for structural analysis of biological macromolecules Methods of structural analysis of biologically significant macromolecules have been developing towards smaller sample volumes and higher effectivness of crystallisation and structural analysis. This project will introduce methods of nanoliter volume crystallisation, atomated classification of crystallisation experiment and automated methods of structure solution and analysis in local research environment. Concurrently this methodology will be applied to several specific examples of structural studies ofprotein systems, e.g. of enzyme and receptor type and their complexes with natural and synthetic ligands, in collaboration with Czech and foreign research partners. Methodology introduction together with gaining the indespensible minimum equipment will result in a conrete output of structural analysis on various classes of enzymes together with creating a working environment of European level. This project will also enable a valuable scientific input into young scientific generation. makromolekulární krystalografie; metody vysoké účinnosti; strukturní biologie; strukturní genomika; krystalizace v nanolitrových objemech; automatizované určení struktury; systém monitorování laboratorních výsledků; bezbuněčná translace	Introduction of advanced methods of structural genomics for structural analysis of biological macromolecules Methods of structural analysis of biologically significant macromolecules have been developing towards smaller sample volumes and higher effectivness of crystallisation and structural analysis. This project will introduce methods of nanoliter volume crystallisation, atomated classification of crystallisation experiment and automated methods of structure solution and analysis in local research environment. Concurrently this methodology will be applied to several specific examples of structural studies ofprotein systems, e.g. of enzyme and receptor type and their complexes with natural and synthetic ligands, in collaboration with Czech and foreign research partners. Methodology introduction together with gaining the indespensible minimum equipment will result in a conrete output of structural analysis on various classes of enzymes together with creating a working environment of European level. This project will also enable a valuable scientific input into young scientific generation. makromolekulární krystalografie; metody vysoké účinnosti; strukturní biologie; strukturní genomika; krystalizace v nanolitrových objemech; automatizované určení struktury; systém monitorování laboratorních výsledků; bezbuněčná translace
Analysis of splicing factor mutations connected with the inherited retinitis pigmentosa Pre-mRNA splicing is one of the key steps in the regulation of gene expression and mutations influencing pre-mRNA splicing were found in many genetic disorders. In this project, we propose to study two proteins - 61K and hPrp3, which participate in the formation of splicing complexes. Mutations of 61K and hPrp3 were found in patients with autosomal inherited retinitis pigmentosa. Using molecular and cell biology techniques (RT-PCR, FRAP, FRET, imunoprecipitation) we will test how mutations in 61K and hPrp3 influence the formation of splicing complexes and pre-mRNA splicing. retinitis pigmentosa; pre-mRNA sestřih; malé jaderné ribonukleoproteiny	Analysis of splicing factor mutations connected with the inherited retinitis pigmentosa Pre-mRNA splicing is one of the key steps in the regulation of gene expression and mutations influencing pre-mRNA splicing were found in many genetic disorders. In this project, we propose to study two proteins - 61K and hPrp3, which participate in the formation of splicing complexes. Mutations of 61K and hPrp3 were found in patients with autosomal inherited retinitis pigmentosa. Using molecular and cell biology techniques (RT-PCR, FRAP, FRET, imunoprecipitation) we will test how mutations in 61K and hPrp3 influence the formation of splicing complexes and pre-mRNA splicing. retinitis pigmentosa; pre-mRNA sestřih; malé jaderné ribonukleoproteiny
Changes in educational stratification across the life-course and the effect of political institutions on education inequality: the case of Central and Eastern Europe after 1945 The project investigates sociologically the relationship between educational attainment and the life cycle. It seeks to investigate the following issues: (1) Does the effect of family background on the odds of making an educational transition change across one's life-course? (2) Who re-enters school after an episode of interruption? Do delayed educational transitions favor the children of better-off families, or is school re-entry a second chance for children of disadvantaged families? (3) What is the effect of political institutions and educational policies on the life-course effect? Do delayed educational transitions compensate for an initial political intervention into the stratification process, or do they function as an instrument of educational policies to reduce inequality in access to education? vzdělanostní nerovnosti; výzkum životního cyklu; srovnávací stratifikace	Changes in educational stratification across the life-course and the effect of political institutions on education inequality: the case of Central and Eastern Europe after 1945 The project investigates sociologically the relationship between educational attainment and the life cycle. It seeks to investigate the following issues: (1) Does the effect of family background on the odds of making an educational transition change across one's life-course? (2) Who re-enters school after an episode of interruption? Do delayed educational transitions favor the children of better-off families, or is school re-entry a second chance for children of disadvantaged families? (3) What is the effect of political institutions and educational policies on the life-course effect? Do delayed educational transitions compensate for an initial political intervention into the stratification process, or do they function as an instrument of educational policies to reduce inequality in access to education? vzdělanostní nerovnosti; výzkum životního cyklu; srovnávací stratifikace
Study of the photo-indued changes in amorphous chalcogenides. Construction of illumination system and the study of photo-induced changes of the optical properties induced by sub-gap, band-gap and over-gap photons in selected amorphous chalcogenides. Spectral sensitivity of photo-induced changes and the study of kinetics of photo-induced changes of the optical gap and refractive index. Fotoindukované změny; amorfní chalkogenidy; optický gap; index lomu; kinetika fototmavnutí	Study of the photo-indued changes in amorphous chalcogenides. Construction of illumination system and the study of photo-induced changes of the optical properties induced by sub-gap, band-gap and over-gap photons in selected amorphous chalcogenides. Spectral sensitivity of photo-induced changes and the study of kinetics of photo-induced changes of the optical gap and refractive index. Fotoindukované změny; amorfní chalkogenidy; optický gap; index lomu; kinetika fototmavnutí
Evaluation of soil pollutants bioavailability by chemical extraction and by bioassays Project enables scientific development of Dr. Jakub Hofman supporting six-month stay at Department of Environmental Science, Lancaster University in UK. Dr. Hofman will learn practical and theoretical knowledge in research of bioavailabilty of soil organic pollutants and he will participate on experiments in laboratories of Dr. Semple. Bioavailability will be evaluated by chemical extraction and by degradability and ecotoxicity bioassays. Results will be published. New methods and know-how will be transfered to Masaryk University laboratories and the science quality will be increased there by this way. Collaboration of two reasearch groups will be established. kontaminace půdy; biodostupnost; chemická extrahovatelnost; biodegradace; ekotoxicita; biotest; POPs	Evaluation of soil pollutants bioavailability by chemical extraction and by bioassays Project enables scientific development of Dr. Jakub Hofman supporting six-month stay at Department of Environmental Science, Lancaster University in UK. Dr. Hofman will learn practical and theoretical knowledge in research of bioavailabilty of soil organic pollutants and he will participate on experiments in laboratories of Dr. Semple. Bioavailability will be evaluated by chemical extraction and by degradability and ecotoxicity bioassays. Results will be published. New methods and know-how will be transfered to Masaryk University laboratories and the science quality will be increased there by this way. Collaboration of two reasearch groups will be established. kontaminace půdy; biodostupnost; chemická extrahovatelnost; biodegradace; ekotoxicita; biotest; POPs
The optimalization methods of production oocytes and cryopreservation embryos of cattle and pigs The main objective of this project is getting information about procedures and methods of obtaining and maturing oocytes at "in vitro" conditions.Get knowledge about oocytes cultivation "in vitro" and next aim is acquainted with methods and process of cryopreservation and preparation of embryos for transfer to the recipients. oocyty; in vitro podmínky; kryokonzervace; embrya; recioientky	The optimalization methods of production oocytes and cryopreservation embryos of cattle and pigs The main objective of this project is getting information about procedures and methods of obtaining and maturing oocytes at "in vitro" conditions.Get knowledge about oocytes cultivation "in vitro" and next aim is acquainted with methods and process of cryopreservation and preparation of embryos for transfer to the recipients. oocyty; in vitro podmínky; kryokonzervace; embrya; recioientky
The improvement and quality of analytical work as tool for increasing of foodstuff chain safety and consumer health The project is aimed to problems of improvement and development of analytical methods for control of quality of milk and milk products. It is one of basic links of food chain. The work is focused on methods of determination of nutrient composition of milk (fat, proteins, macro-elements - Ca, Mg, P etc. and micro-elements - Se, Zn, I, Cu) and to methods of determination pollutants (heavy metals - Pb, Cd etc.) mléko; mléčné produkty; mléčný tuk; makroprvky; mikroprvky; analytické metody; atomová absorpční spektroskopie; chromatografie	The improvement and quality of analytical work as tool for increasing of foodstuff chain safety and consumer health The project is aimed to problems of improvement and development of analytical methods for control of quality of milk and milk products. It is one of basic links of food chain. The work is focused on methods of determination of nutrient composition of milk (fat, proteins, macro-elements - Ca, Mg, P etc. and micro-elements - Se, Zn, I, Cu) and to methods of determination pollutants (heavy metals - Pb, Cd etc.) mléko; mléčné produkty; mléčný tuk; makroprvky; mikroprvky; analytické metody; atomová absorpční spektroskopie; chromatografie
Research stay at the Kristianstad University. Project solves the special work stay of the research worker of the institute at the noted research workplace at Kristianstad University. This stay will solve the research based on the simulation of plastic injection into moulds, practical experiments andverification of simulation. The stay length is 6 months. simulace; vstřikování; plasty; formy	Research stay at the Kristianstad University. Project solves the special work stay of the research worker of the institute at the noted research workplace at Kristianstad University. This stay will solve the research based on the simulation of plastic injection into moulds, practical experiments andverification of simulation. The stay length is 6 months. simulace; vstřikování; plasty; formy
Nanotechniques and nanomaterials application in chemical sensors The Project is focused on research and development of nanotechnologies applications in chemical microsensors. It is built up on collaboration University Rovira i Virgili in Tarragona in Spain. This collaboration advance in gas microsensor area and now itstarts to develop also in nanotechnology application for microsensors. The project should bring close collaboration through research stay of Jaromir Hubalek at URV in Tarragona, to design and to create microsensors using nanotechnologies and after his comeback to use his obtained knowledge and experiences for projects solved in Department of Microelectronics at Brno University of Technology. chemické senzory; senzory plynů; nanoporézní materiály; nanostruktury; nanotechnologie; nanotechniky	Nanotechniques and nanomaterials application in chemical sensors The Project is focused on research and development of nanotechnologies applications in chemical microsensors. It is built up on collaboration University Rovira i Virgili in Tarragona in Spain. This collaboration advance in gas microsensor area and now itstarts to develop also in nanotechnology application for microsensors. The project should bring close collaboration through research stay of Jaromir Hubalek at URV in Tarragona, to design and to create microsensors using nanotechnologies and after his comeback to use his obtained knowledge and experiences for projects solved in Department of Microelectronics at Brno University of Technology. chemické senzory; senzory plynů; nanoporézní materiály; nanostruktury; nanotechnologie; nanotechniky
Hybrides nanocomposites magnetics for diagnosis and therapy in medicine The project is aimed on the development of new magnetic nanoparticles for applications in medicine. It covers synthesis of magnetic particles based on mixed magnetic oxides and subsequent preparation of composite magnetic microspheres using biocompatiblemolecules and polymers. hybridní magnetické nanočástice; směsné magnetické oxidy; diagnostika; terapie	Hybrides nanocomposites magnetics for diagnosis and therapy in medicine The project is aimed on the development of new magnetic nanoparticles for applications in medicine. It covers synthesis of magnetic particles based on mixed magnetic oxides and subsequent preparation of composite magnetic microspheres using biocompatiblemolecules and polymers. hybridní magnetické nanočástice; směsné magnetické oxidy; diagnostika; terapie
Ab inito study of electrical and mechanical properties of nanosystems. The goal of the project is a development of theoretical model based on a combination of ab initio electronic sturture calculation based on Density Functional Theory (DFT) and Green's function method allowing realistic description of transport and mechanical properties of nanostructures. In the frame of the project the developed method will be used to study transport and mechanical properties of selected metallic nanocontacts and to analyse interaction of tip/sample of Nanoprobes. Ab inito výpočty; Keldyšovy Greenovy funkce; nanostruktury; teorie funkcionálu hustoty; spinově polarizovaný transport	Ab inito study of electrical and mechanical properties of nanosystems. The goal of the project is a development of theoretical model based on a combination of ab initio electronic sturture calculation based on Density Functional Theory (DFT) and Green's function method allowing realistic description of transport and mechanical properties of nanostructures. In the frame of the project the developed method will be used to study transport and mechanical properties of selected metallic nanocontacts and to analyse interaction of tip/sample of Nanoprobes. Ab inito výpočty; Keldyšovy Greenovy funkce; nanostruktury; teorie funkcionálu hustoty; spinově polarizovaný transport
Reconstruction of objects from biomedical images using statistic methods and artificial intelligence The aim of this project is to study, analyze and design selected segmentation methods in order to use them when reconstructing the objects from biomedical images. These methods include statistical edge and corner detectors on one hand, and artificial neural networks, on the other hand. The edge detection usually belongs between the first executed steps in image reconstruction. In this way, the primal temporary results, which are further used as an input for more complex and sophisticated segmentation methods, are produced. An example of such complex methods can be mathematical morphology, deformable models or artificial neural networks. The last one is focused on in this project. The statistical edge detectors as well as neural networks can be classified as noise robust methods. Since the biomedical images are full of noise, these two image processing methods are deeply focused on. The crucial part of this project consists in close cooperation with Manchester Metropolitan University (MMU), where statistická analýza; neuronové sítě; rekonstrukce objektů v histologických snímcích	Reconstruction of objects from biomedical images using statistic methods and artificial intelligence The aim of this project is to study, analyze and design selected segmentation methods in order to use them when reconstructing the objects from biomedical images. These methods include statistical edge and corner detectors on one hand, and artificial neural networks, on the other hand. The edge detection usually belongs between the first executed steps in image reconstruction. In this way, the primal temporary results, which are further used as an input for more complex and sophisticated segmentation methods, are produced. An example of such complex methods can be mathematical morphology, deformable models or artificial neural networks. The last one is focused on in this project. The statistical edge detectors as well as neural networks can be classified as noise robust methods. Since the biomedical images are full of noise, these two image processing methods are deeply focused on. The crucial part of this project consists in close cooperation with Manchester Metropolitan University (MMU), where statistická analýza; neuronové sítě; rekonstrukce objektů v histologických snímcích
Assessment of urbanization impact on small streams by biological indicators The development of urban areas means the most profound change to the original natural relationships between the soil and water ecosystems. In this sense, the most significant impact of the urban development process is modification of the hydrological cycle and rainfall-runoff relationships. Changes of chemical and physico-chemical state including water and bed sediment degradation, which affects composition and survival of aquatic organisms, are the another important impact. Changes in biological component are then consequence of changes in original environment. Level of technical and technological solution of problems is limited by recent level of knowledge in range of disciplines. In contrast to past, when the main respect within sewer systems was turned to technical level of particular components of sewer net, today urban drainage is taken as controllable complex with minimization of negative impact of pollution drainage on receiving water with minimum expenses as a main goal. Recent solution of pr urbanizace; městské odvodnění; ekologický stav; těžké kovy; hodnocení rizika; obnova společenstva	Assessment of urbanization impact on small streams by biological indicators The development of urban areas means the most profound change to the original natural relationships between the soil and water ecosystems. In this sense, the most significant impact of the urban development process is modification of the hydrological cycle and rainfall-runoff relationships. Changes of chemical and physico-chemical state including water and bed sediment degradation, which affects composition and survival of aquatic organisms, are the another important impact. Changes in biological component are then consequence of changes in original environment. Level of technical and technological solution of problems is limited by recent level of knowledge in range of disciplines. In contrast to past, when the main respect within sewer systems was turned to technical level of particular components of sewer net, today urban drainage is taken as controllable complex with minimization of negative impact of pollution drainage on receiving water with minimum expenses as a main goal. Recent solution of pr urbanizace; městské odvodnění; ekologický stav; těžké kovy; hodnocení rizika; obnova společenstva
Representations of Sexuality: Reproduction and Subversion of Gender Inequalities The aim of the proposed project is to critically analyze from a sociological perspective European and American feminist texts on pornography as representations of sexuality. The proposed research will include secondary analysis of the empirical sociological research of pornography´s impact on consumers, and a content analysis of a representative sample of porn video materials available in the Czech Republic. The project deals with possible linkages connecting porn and violence against women, reproduction of gender inequalities, and the contingent character of gender, sex, sexuality, and representations of sexuality. reprezentace sexuality; reprodukce genderových nerovností; gender; feministická teorie; pornografie; sociologická analýza	Representations of Sexuality: Reproduction and Subversion of Gender Inequalities The aim of the proposed project is to critically analyze from a sociological perspective European and American feminist texts on pornography as representations of sexuality. The proposed research will include secondary analysis of the empirical sociological research of pornography´s impact on consumers, and a content analysis of a representative sample of porn video materials available in the Czech Republic. The project deals with possible linkages connecting porn and violence against women, reproduction of gender inequalities, and the contingent character of gender, sex, sexuality, and representations of sexuality. reprezentace sexuality; reprodukce genderových nerovností; gender; feministická teorie; pornografie; sociologická analýza
Influence of entrapped air on preferential flow and contaminant transport in heterogeneous soils Modeling of solute transport in soil could play a significant role in process of developing such regulative measures which will prevent breakthrough of agricultural chemicals into subsurface sources of drinking water. Currently, models of water flow andcontaminant transport does not provide reliable predictions for some soils. Temporal instability of soil hydraulic properties can be a possible reason. Tests performed in laboratory and in field showed that hydraulic properties can change in order of several hundred percent in time. Many authors consider the presence of the entrapped air in pores as a possible reason. The aim of research project is to determine how the hydraulic and transport properties are affected by presence of entrapped air with special focus on the preferential flow domain. To achieve the specified goal we propose to perform a series of infiltration-outflow experiments in laboratory, using large undisturbed columns of selected soils. The soil column weight, cumulative infiltratio uzavřený vzduch; preferenční proudění; infiltrace; infiltračně výtokový experiment; pesticidy; transport rozpuštěných látek; půda; heterogenní půda; nestabilní proudění	Influence of entrapped air on preferential flow and contaminant transport in heterogeneous soils Modeling of solute transport in soil could play a significant role in process of developing such regulative measures which will prevent breakthrough of agricultural chemicals into subsurface sources of drinking water. Currently, models of water flow andcontaminant transport does not provide reliable predictions for some soils. Temporal instability of soil hydraulic properties can be a possible reason. Tests performed in laboratory and in field showed that hydraulic properties can change in order of several hundred percent in time. Many authors consider the presence of the entrapped air in pores as a possible reason. The aim of research project is to determine how the hydraulic and transport properties are affected by presence of entrapped air with special focus on the preferential flow domain. To achieve the specified goal we propose to perform a series of infiltration-outflow experiments in laboratory, using large undisturbed columns of selected soils. The soil column weight, cumulative infiltratio uzavřený vzduch; preferenční proudění; infiltrace; infiltračně výtokový experiment; pesticidy; transport rozpuštěných látek; půda; heterogenní půda; nestabilní proudění
Synthesis of new Si-O(N)-C materials by plasma enhanced CVD The purpose of the project is the synthesis of new Si-O-C:H polymers variable in their nanostructure and organic-inorganic character and the synthesis of hard protective Si-O-C and Si-N-C films exhibiting low internal stress and good adhesion to different substrates. Siloxane polymers will be prepared by PECVD in r.f. plasma of glow discharge with organosilicon reactants (hexamethyldisiloxan, oktamethylcyklotetrasiloxan, dekamethylcyklopentasiloxan) under low ion bombardment. The novelty of the proposedapproach consists in application of pulsed r.f. discharge that makes possible changes in monomer structure retention by variation of the duty cycle. Hard Si-O-C and Si-N-C films will be prepared in capacitively and inductively coupled r.f. discharge under ion bombardment assistance. Namely the nanocomposite DLC:SiOx films will be prepared in connection with previous successful experiments and their deposition will be optimized for various substrate materials (glass, metals, plastics). Prepared films wi plazmochemická depozice z plynné fáze; PECVD; polymery; tvrdé vrstvy; nanostrukturní materiály; nanokompozitní materiály; diagnostika plazmatu	Synthesis of new Si-O(N)-C materials by plasma enhanced CVD The purpose of the project is the synthesis of new Si-O-C:H polymers variable in their nanostructure and organic-inorganic character and the synthesis of hard protective Si-O-C and Si-N-C films exhibiting low internal stress and good adhesion to different substrates. Siloxane polymers will be prepared by PECVD in r.f. plasma of glow discharge with organosilicon reactants (hexamethyldisiloxan, oktamethylcyklotetrasiloxan, dekamethylcyklopentasiloxan) under low ion bombardment. The novelty of the proposedapproach consists in application of pulsed r.f. discharge that makes possible changes in monomer structure retention by variation of the duty cycle. Hard Si-O-C and Si-N-C films will be prepared in capacitively and inductively coupled r.f. discharge under ion bombardment assistance. Namely the nanocomposite DLC:SiOx films will be prepared in connection with previous successful experiments and their deposition will be optimized for various substrate materials (glass, metals, plastics). Prepared films wi plazmochemická depozice z plynné fáze; PECVD; polymery; tvrdé vrstvy; nanostrukturní materiály; nanokompozitní materiály; diagnostika plazmatu
Interaction of high-power laser pulses with matter Our proposal will enable research into the high-power laser-matter interaction. We will investigate two different regimes at our reach - at world-class facilities in Prague" 1) Long-pulse regime (nanoseconds) at the Prague Asterix Laser System (PALS) facility that has been recently installed and that is a member of the European high-power laser network. 2) (smaller part of the project, getting in the business with Prague facility) Ultra-short pulse regime (fs-ps) at the new facility that is going tobe constructed at the Faculty of Nuclear Sciences and Physical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, or at European facilities abroad based on our previous collaborations with them. In both directions of our research, we will investigate especially fundamental plasma physics principles at the interaction of high-intensity radiation with matter (solid targets, foam targets or gas targets), especially efficiency of generation and transport of electrons and x-ray generation. interakce laser-hmota; vykonne lasery; rentgenove zdroje; laserove plasma	Interaction of high-power laser pulses with matter Our proposal will enable research into the high-power laser-matter interaction. We will investigate two different regimes at our reach - at world-class facilities in Prague" 1) Long-pulse regime (nanoseconds) at the Prague Asterix Laser System (PALS) facility that has been recently installed and that is a member of the European high-power laser network. 2) (smaller part of the project, getting in the business with Prague facility) Ultra-short pulse regime (fs-ps) at the new facility that is going tobe constructed at the Faculty of Nuclear Sciences and Physical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, or at European facilities abroad based on our previous collaborations with them. In both directions of our research, we will investigate especially fundamental plasma physics principles at the interaction of high-intensity radiation with matter (solid targets, foam targets or gas targets), especially efficiency of generation and transport of electrons and x-ray generation. interakce laser-hmota; vykonne lasery; rentgenove zdroje; laserove plasma
